* A Distributed Proofreaders Canada eBook *

This eBook is made available at no cost and with very few
restrictions. These restrictions apply only if (1) you make
a change in the eBook (other than alteration for different
display devices), or (2) you are making commercial use of
the eBook. If either of these conditions applies, please
contact a https://www.fadedpage.com administrator before proceeding.
Thousands more FREE eBooks are available at https://www.fadedpage.com.

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be under
copyright in some countries. If you live outside Canada, check your
country's copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER COPYRIGHT
IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT DOWNLOAD OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE.

Title: Men on Trial
Date of first publication: 1945
Author: Peter Howard (1908-1965)
Date first posted: June 3, 2020
Date last updated: June 3, 2020
Faded Page eBook #20200606

This eBook was produced by: Al Haines




  MEN ON TRIAL

  BY

  PETER HOWARD



  BLANDFORD PRESS LTD.
  16 WEST CENTRAL STREET
  LONDON, W.C.1




  By the same Author

  INNOCENT MEN 1941 (155th thousand)
  FIGHTERS EVER 1941 (330th thousand)
  IDEAS HAVE LEGS 1945 (75th thousand)



  First published October 1945



  PRINTED AT PENDRAGON PRESS,
  PAPWORTH EVERARD, CAMBRIDGE,
  ENGLAND.




CONTENTS

Chapter

I. Am I My Brother's Keeper?

II. Roses, Roses All The Way

III. The David of Downing Street

IV. Ernest in Wonderland

V. Man or Monkey?

VI. Hurly-Burly, Burly Pearly King

VII. Personality or Prophet?

VIII. The Cat that Walks Alone

IX. Big Ben's Babies

X. Bobbety

XI. The Ghost that Would not go West

XII. Diamonds in the Desert

XIII. Gentlemen _and_ Players

XIV. Britain's Brown-Eyed Boy

XV. The True Battle Line

XVI. Man from Missouri




MEN ON TRIAL



CHAPTER ONE

AM I MY BROTHER'S KEEPER?

One autumn morning I trod my way to work on my Anglian farm along a
secret, scented hedgerow path beaten into hardness by the clump,
clump, clump of generations of agricultural boots against the soil.

The apples hung from the trees, red with sunshine and warm with the
sap of bygone summer.  The uncut corn spread drowsily to the horizon
and rippled in the waves of heat.

I took my four-pronged fork and began to shovel black moist muck from
the cattle-yard into the tumbrils.

All through winter and spring beasts had slept, strolled and sweated
knee-deep in the straw, munching beans and oats, mangolds, sugar-beet
pulp and hay.  The beasts were fattened and gone.  But what they left
behind them, pregnant with future harvests, was passing out again on
to the fields, fulfilling the ageless cycle of the soil which takes
back all that it has yielded and once more makes it fit for the mouth
of man.

I did not sing at my work that morning.  As my back began to ache in
the rhythm of the toil, my heart ached too with a sense of
apprehension and foreboding.  For overhead, hour upon hour, in steady
formation, the tugs and gliders flew East towards Arnhem.  In one of
them was my young and only brother.

I wondered whether John would look out upon the farm as he passed by.
He knew the place and loved it.  He had shot partridges there and
tramped the fields with me.  Only a few weeks before he had written
asking if he could come and work there when the war was over.

So gay and brave I pictured him, as I straightened my aching back in
the cattle-yard, and, resting on my fork, strained my eyes to watch
the airborne cavalcade ride by.

His eyes were green-blue and his hair was golden.  All through the
war he fought--a private in the artillery, commando raids on the
Channel Isles and Lofoten, a commission to the Royal Sussex Regiment,
wounded at Alamein, now a captain in the Airborne Division on his way
to Arnhem.  "It will take more than a Nazi to get me," he said last
time I saw him.

John never came back from Arnhem.  He was still living and unhurt two
days after he was dropped.  That is all we know.

Most of his company were killed.  They were at the flash-point of the
fighting.  John was enraged at the death of his friends.  He was last
seen by a British scout two miles outside our perimeter, hiding by
himself in a ditch and sniping at the enemy.  The scout asked him
whether he would not return to the perimeter.  "I'm doing very well
where I am, thank you," answered John.  So the scout gave him a few
biscuits and a hunk of cheese and left him alone in his ditch with
the enemy all around him.  Soon the War Office reported him as
"Missing."

Of course we all hoped, his parents, his young wife and I, for
further news.  We prayed he might be hiding up in some Dutch
farmstead or lurking in the woods foraging for himself by night as he
was so well able to do.  We hoped he might be in some German prison
camp with news of him delayed on account of the smashing of German
communications.

The uncertainty was almost more terrible than the truth, and
sometimes at night one of those who missed the boy would lie awake
thinking of terrors which might have befallen him.

Someone sent me a letter which said, "In the eyes of God there is no
such thing as 'Missing'."  That simple truth helped us.

Probably we never shall know his exact fate this side of eternity.
Perhaps he lies in one of those graves marked "Unknown British
soldier" or "Unknown German soldier" which are spread far and wide
among the pines and wastes of the desolated Arnhem countryside, where
experts say some of the most savage fighting of the whole war against
Hitler's Reich took place.

Dear young and only brother John.  I remember him as a fat, wriggling
baby searching the carpet for imaginary animals called "Beadles"
which he pretended to stuff down your neck.

I remember him winning the race at his prep school, so proud and so
eager he was, with our father and me cantering along beside him
cheering him to victory as he entered the straight towards the tape.

He was lucky at fairs--I can see him now carelessly bowling pennies
down to the board of squares and going off presently with his pockets
full of cash, the showman scowling and the girls who had gathered to
look on all giggling and nudging each other.

He was a slashing cricketer and scored more direct hits on the body
with his own fast bowling and more direct hits on other people's fast
bowling with his own bat than almost anybody else I know.

I can picture him hot and happy running in the sunshine or with a
cool serious gaze studying some book, then bursting into roars of
laughter, hurling it from him and springing halfway across the room
with a single galvanic bound.

Hard it is to believe that someone so young and vehement can be so
quiet and still.  Many of us in so many lands today have simple and
cherished recollections like this, pearls of great price threaded on
the everlasting string of memory, about someone we have loved and
lost awhile.

To me the worst pain of such a parting is the thought of how
differently I should have acted if we could have our times together
again.  If only I had not said that...  If only I had not done
this...  If only...

I loved the boy so much and often showed it him so badly.  He was
trying to get me on the telephone a few days before he flew to
Arnhem.  But I was away from home.  I often wonder what it was he
wished to say to me.

John never voted at an election.  Like many thousands of others who
died so that men should be free to make their choice of government,
he was too young when war broke out ever himself to have played a
part in that process of democracy.

But he once helped to canvass for a Labour candidate at a
by-election.  John set his political hopes for the future on Labour.
And he told me why.  He used to say to me something like this.  "At
least I know what the Labour Party stand for.  They stand for a
square deal for you and me, with food, a house and a job for all who
will do it.  They stand for everybody having an equal chance and for
more even distribution of the wealth of the world--not cigars at the
Ritz and starvation at the Rhondda, not duck at the Berkeley and dole
at Barrow.  Whether they'll be able to give it to us, I don't know.
A lot of folk say they are incompetent.  Well, my hunch is that they
are a good bit more competent than people imagine.  Anyway, they
can't be much worse than the Tories.  And I don't understand what it
is the Tories do believe in, except everybody who has anything
clinging on to it like a limpet and everybody doing what they like
and to hell with the hindmost."

Then I remember he once said rather wistfully as he puffed at a pipe
several sizes too large for him, "There was a wonderful spirit out in
the desert with the Eighth Army, you know.  You felt a real
comradeship in arms.  That's the spirit we want when the war is
over--but I suppose it is impossible in peace time."

Now Labour is in power in Britain, the party on which John's
political hopes were set.  That party, as the party in power, carries
with it the dreams and hearts not only of the Johns who died for
liberty in foreign seas and lands and skies, but also of the Toms and
Dicks and Harrys of every shade of political conviction who return
home to build the new world we're wanting.

At the end of the first great war against Germany there was a foolish
hope in the minds of millions that peace and a new world were secure
for ever, that they would somehow drop into our lap without anybody
in particular doing very much more about it.

At the end of this war against Hitlerism few have such over-easy
confidence.  Instead a measure of cynicism, equally foolish and no
less dangerous, is widespread among the British people, the belief
that wars are perhaps inevitable, that we can never win the kind of
world we long for our children to enjoy, that mankind is caught like
some dumb beast in a trap, condemned for ever to endure a measure of
uncertainty and despair.

I do not accept this policy of defeat.  I believe that British Labour
has today one of the most golden chances ever entrusted to a party by
the masses of the people, glittering opportunity at a time when the
difficulties and dangers are as dark as ever before in our long
history.  But I do not think the fact that Labour is in power is by
itself sufficient to usher in the millennium.

No.  Labour governs us--but what idea will govern Labour?  Will it be
Labour led by God to remake the world or Labour led by the nose to
remake the mess?

And the Conservatives?  What is their part today?  They have an
opportunity as vital and constructive in opposition as they ever had
in power.  The nation needs the traditions of faith and patriotism
which Toryism at its best embodies.  Will Conservatives rise to their
destiny?

These are the most important questions the coming years will answer.
The answers will settle the fate of our children.

Every citizen and every party in the state has its part to play in
securing the peace and building the new world.  I am my brother's
keeper.  So are we all.  It is up to nobody but us.

In this book, written by John's brother and the father of three
children growing up as hostages to the future, are set out some of
the personalities who will dominate the political scene.  I present
them to you warts and all--as they are today and as they can become
tomorrow.




CHAPTER TWO

ROSES, ROSES ALL THE WAY

_The Rt. Hon. Winston Churchill_

When the late Philip Snowden, that grim crippled chip of Yorkshire
granite, was driven back to Downing Street after his return from the
Hague Conference on Reparations in 1929 and shortly after the
formation of a Labour Government, the air broke into a mist with
bells, the roofs and balconies and pavements of London seemed to
heave and rock with the plaudits of the people.

Snowden, as Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer, had defied the
world at that conference.  When the Italian delegates after several
hours of private consultation informed him that they were unable to
agree to his terms, he merely remarked, "Then lock yourselves in your
room, gentlemen, and stay there until you do."

When the French after haggling a whole day declared they could do no
more, Snowden said, "Go through your pockets again.  I am sure you
will find enough left to cover what remains between us.  It is out of
the kindness of my heart that I wish you to do this, for I want you
to have the satisfaction of having saved the conference."

So Snowden came back home with victory perched upon his banners.
Unsmilingly he rode through the cheering multitudes.  When he reached
the quiet of his room in Downing Street a friend said to him, "Well,
what do you think of this reception?" Snowden replied, "These things
do not move me.  I have seen too much of the fickleness of public
opinion.  One day the public put a halo round your head and the next
day they press a crown of thorns upon your brow."

Winston Churchill, who fought Snowden fiercely through the tumult of
a political lifetime and praised him when he was dead, must have had
that philosophy of his old rival in his mind as he saw the 1945
election results coming over the tape and realised how decisively the
British people were rejecting the post-war leadership of a man who
had led them through the passages of hell and the doorposts of death
itself.

Churchill is proud.  He takes political defeat hard.  He takes it as
a personal affront.  It is one of the paradoxes of this citizen of
destiny that although himself a Battling Butler of politics he is
immensely and unduly sensitive to a debating cross-counter.

He reserves the right to criticise with violence when he is in
opposition.  Yet when in power he interprets similar tactics as
mutinous and indeed almost treacherous to the state.

As a war leader Churchill is unsurpassed.  He has claims to be the
greatest war leader of all time.  Destiny is the womb from which he
sprang and history will be the shrine wherein he rests.  No other man
could have done for Britain, and no other man has done for Britain,
what Churchill did for us in our dark hour of history.  His pride in
race and tradition and nationhood forbade him--and us--to admit even
for a moment the prospect of defeat.

It is this proud quality, so essentially British, which makes other
nations admire and love us in adversity and sometimes fear and
dislike us when we prosper.

Churchill enjoys power.  It is a drug which greatly stimulates him.
He expected to retain it.  He meant to govern Britain for some time
after war ended.  I remember as long ago as 1941 saying to Brendan
Bracken, Churchill's intimate friend, "If Winston is wise he will
retire from public life the day Nazi Germany surrenders."  Bracken
answered, "He intends to stay on at least a year after that.  He will
be needed to settle the problems of Europe."

It is this serene self-confidence which served the nation so well in
the toils and served the man himself so ill at the polls.

Churchill was too certain of himself in his appeal to Britain at the
election.  He seemed over cock-sure.  He thought it was adequate to
reply to a programme with a personality.  The people chose the
programme.

He answered ideas with smears, concrete proposals with clever tricks.
And yet ... and yet--in some of the broadcast speeches which caused
the greatest controversy Churchill had hold of the hem of Truth's
skirt, although he was quite unable to present the garment to the
electorate in such shape that they would wear it.

For instance, his references to secret police were greeted with a
shout of rage and incredulity from the Cuillins to the Isle of Wight.
Yet it is a fact that the battle within the ranks of Labour (and,
incidentally, within the ranks of Toryism too) between the militant
minority who desire control for the sake of the power it gives them
and the well-meaning but sometimes over-quiescent majority who only
desire as much control as national interest demands, has yet finally
to be decided.

But Churchill over-simplified the issue.  He tried to indict the
entire Labour Party as materialistic apostles of Marx.  It was the
old technique of Hitler who suggested that _all_ who disagreed with
him were Jewish bolsheviks.  It is the new technique of certain
sections of the Left who assert that _all_ non-Leftists are fascist
reactionaries.

Churchill is a strange mixture of contradictory elements.  He fears
nobody--and does not deeply care for many outside his immediate
circle.

He excites the most intense loyalty and devotion from his
friends--and he takes this very much as a matter of course.  He
treats his political adversaries with extreme violence, but quite
soon forgives them for it.

He is often bad-tempered, except when things go really wrong.  Then
he is an island of calm in a sea of troubles.  He can be extremely
polite to dustmen and exceedingly rude to duchesses.

He loves the good things of life.  I was once at a public dinner
where he refused to make the speech expected of him until a
particular article of refreshment had been procured for him.  On the
other hand he wandered through the London blitz in his siren suit and
a tin hat carrying his dinner in his pocket with him--a plain meat
sandwich.

At times he is intolerant of suggestions.  "You can tell Winnie
anywhere--but you can't tell him much," as a statesman with ideas on
how the war could be won ruefully said to me.  On the other hand
nobody can be more hopeful and helpful if he chooses.  In my days as
a Fleet Street journalist he used to encourage me with advice and
criticism.  When this mood descends upon him he has the art of making
you feel you are the most important person in the world to him at
that moment.

He can be obstinate to the point of folly.  "You can't teach an old
dog new tricks," he is fond of saying.

Once during the later stages of the war when he lay desperately ill
and near to death, his doctor Lord Moran said he would have to be
told to lay off official papers for a time.  But Churchill stubbornly
and steadfastly continued to read himself towards death.  Finally
Brendan Bracken was deputed to end the affair.  He burst into the
sickroom with the terse words "_You are going to die._"

Churchill was jolted.  Then Brendan swiftly added, "Yes, if you go on
like this you are going to die.  You can either live in the interests
of your country or die a martyr to your red boxes."  Seeing the point
Churchill said, "You go to hell."

But the boxes were sent downstairs and Churchill began to pick up.

He is a man of extraordinary talents.  Some of his writing will live
as long as the English language lasts.

He is an orator of front rank although for years he found difficulty
in speaking.  He wrote his speeches out and recited them,
"impromptus" and all, before his bedroom mirror until he learned them
by heart.

He paints in oils for a hobby and paints extremely well.  His London
flat used to be decorated with his own pictures.  The staircase in
it, designed by Churchill, had the walls and ceiling lined with
mirrors which gave it a palatial aspect.  The walls he builds for
relaxation at his lovely country estate are perfectly constructed.

What is his future to be?  He is over seventy it is true.  But he is
vigorous for his years.  He is fond of recalling that Gladstone
fought and won the toughest election campaign of his life when he was
over eighty.

He leads one of the most formidable political parties that ever have
existed, still two hundred strong, remember, in the new House of
Commons.

This amazing man can yet play a part in the unfolding scene of
British history, in the building of the new world my brother John and
his comrades bled to win.  At the time of Dunkirk Churchill told the
House of Commons, "Capital and Labour have cast aside their
interests, rights and customs and put them into the common stock."

The same unity and comradeship is needed throughout the nation if we
are to triumph together over the dangers of peace as we triumphed
together over the dangers of war.  Churchill can help to make or to
mar that unity on which the future of Britain rests.  Now he can
unite or divide this nation.

He can pioneer a new and true conception of democracy.  He can set
his face against carping and bitter impediment so that it shall not
be justly said again as it was by Snowden after the last Labour
Government took office, "It was clear that the Conservative
Opposition were in a state of exasperation from their electoral
defeat and were determined to embarrass the Government in every
possible way."

Churchill can bring the spirit of patriotism and statesmanship to
this Parliament so it becomes the function and desire of the
Opposition to help Government to do better rather than to make
Government do worse.

Churchill will find this approach to those who have rubbed his pride
in the dust contrary to the instincts of a lifetime.  Yet a change of
attitude in this respect could be his biggest contribution to the new
sort of Britain all men long for.

There are years of experience, background and training in the ranks
of Churchill's supporters which, without in any way impairing their
right and indeed their duty to criticise, can be made available and
helpful to the new and less experienced Labour men in these
exceptional days.

So Churchill may stride forward into history with new glories added
to his crown, evermore a patriot, nevermore a partisan, an ally of
all the people in the hour of political defeat as in the years
leading towards military victory.




CHAPTER THREE

THE DAVID OF DOWNING STREET

_The Rt. Hon. C. R. Atlee_

There was once a cobra who remarked "What a funny wee creature" as he
saw a mongoose sidling towards him.  But the mongoose broke the
cobra's back just the same.

Similarly Goliath took a jaundiced view of David's fighting abilities
and so had his head chopped off.

Clement Richard Attlee, Britain's Prime Minister, may turn out to be
like David and the mongoose.  Too many people have written him down
for too long.

"A colourless figure," "A co-ordinator, not a creator," "A political
pigmy"--these are the sort of terms which critics of Labour and folk
inside Labour canvassing other claims to the leadership of the party
have used about the man.

It has all happened before.  When the late and great Lord Curzon
heard that an unknown gentleman called Stanley Baldwin had been
preferred to himself as Bonar Law's successor to the Premiership,
tears of mortification and grief chased each other down his
aristocratic countenance.  Curzon was a man of extreme ability and
knew it.  Of him it was said,

  "My name is George Nathaniel Curzon,
  I am a most superior purzon."


Curzon's verdict on Baldwin was "A man of the utmost insignificance."
Baldwin's reputation has to some extent fallen into decay.  But
whatever else he proved himself to be, the man who led Britain
through nearly twenty years of history, through the General Strike,
the Gold Crisis, the Abdication, was certainly far from insignificant.

What manner of man is Clem?  He is sixty-two years old.  He peers out
at life through slit eyes which give him a somewhat enigmatic
appearance.  He looks you straight in the face as he talks to you.
His head is bony, long and lean and there is a great deal between his
two ears besides skin and water.

On his upper lip he wears a tufty grey-black moustache.  Strange how
many men in all walks of life who have lost the hair from the top of
their head raise a crop on their face, I suppose as some sort of a
demonstration.  This moustache conceals the fact that our Prime
Minister has a strong, straight mouth, with a steely steadiness about
the lip which portraits of Oliver Cromwell have carried down to us.

He has a splendid memory.  The first time I met him he pointed a
finger at me and exclaimed at once, "Howard?  I remember your father
perfectly.  I can see him winning the mile at Haileybury as clearly
as I see you there."  My father and he were just a couple of buddies
at school together and went on together to Oxford University.

At his public school and Oxford our Prime Minister was a Tory and an
Imperialist Tariff Reformer by conviction.  He became a barrister and
as a hobby undertook social work in the East End of London.

What he saw there shocked him into Socialism.  He felt that no
economic system could be right which permitted disease, hunger and
slummery in the richest city the world has ever seen.  It was an
appeal to heart and conscience which stirred Attlee and launched him
on his journey to the highest office in the nation.  Paradoxically
the speeches he now addresses to the public sometimes lack that very
heart-appeal which captured him.  Instead they are head-appeal, trim
and methodical statements of policy, addressed to reason not emotion.

Some say Attlee is cold and stand-offish.  This is not always so.  He
is shy and a life spent in the bash and bang of politics has made him
cautious.  But when you win his confidence he offers you comradeship
of a quality which elicits the most intense loyalty from many of
those close to him.

He still travels all over the country linking up at British Legion
dinners and other similar functions with the friends he made during
the first world war.  He fought right through that war in France,
Mesopotamia and Gallipoli, emerging as a major.

At the time Attlee worked in the East End of London he was taking
Sunday School classes.  It was the contradiction as he saw it between
Capitalism and Christianity which set his course.

He says, "I think that the first place in the influences that built
up the Socialist movement must be given to religion....  To put the
Bible into the hands of an Englishman is to do a very dangerous thing
... the Bible is full of revolutionary teaching....  I think that
probably the majority of those who have built up the Socialist
movement in this country have been adherents of the Christian
religion--and not merely adherents, but enthusiastic members of some
religious body."

The Prime Minister adds, "It is not the theories so much as the lives
of those who advocate them which really count in the progress of a
great movement."

From these remarks it can be judged that our Prime Minister believes
the moral conduct and convictions of Labour M.P.s. and Labour
rank-and-file are of supreme importance if the party is to fulfil its
destiny and we are to have a new world.

The Prime Minister is a devoted family man.  At the age of
thirty-nine he married a radiant and gracious girl, Helen Millar of
Hampstead.  They have three daughters and a son who is at present
serving as a midshipman in a British collier.

Attlee enjoys pottering round the garden clipping the hedges and
tidying the lawns.  He is an enthusiastic amateur carpenter.  He eats
quantities of books at a gulp and his tried favourites are Jane
Austen's _Pride and Prejudice_ and Pepys' _Diary_.  At home he helps
Mrs. Attlee feed the chickens and is not above rolling up his sleeves
and giving a hand with the wash-up.

He is a prisoner to his pipe.  He smokes it almost ceaselessly but
finds it hard to keep the thing alight.  It has been calculated that
he burns an ounce of matches to every ounce of tobacco that he
consumes.  He is a moderate eater and sips an occasional glass of
sherry, port or claret.  He plays bridge at which he is a fair
performer.  During parts of the blitz on London he sat in Lord
Beaverbrook's air raid shelter at the Ministry of Aircraft Production
playing cards for small cash stakes.  He has been known to lash a
small, hard ball on a golfcourse and smash a larger, softer ball on a
tennis court.

He is a club man, belonging to the Oxford and Cambridge and the
Athenæum.  Often he has been seen sitting sunk in an armchair at the
Athenæum reading the newspaper just as Lord Baldwin does when he is
in town.  By way of contrast I am told that at Cabinet meetings
Attlee sits leaning forward on the edge of his chair, modestly but
swiftly interposing.  Sometimes he is diffident but like the famous
old pig "he won't be druv."

This can be said of Attlee.  He is entirely sincere.  He is an honest
man.  He wants less for himself out of public life than most men in
the game today.  He offers his colleagues a loyalty which not all of
them have repaid to him.  And he is so sanguine in his judgment of
his own crowd that at times he becomes almost dangerously naïve about
them.  He tends to be shrewder about things than people.

It is typical of Britain that the first man to lead a Labour working
majority in the House of Commons should not himself spring from the
so-called working classes.  For Attlee's father was a successful
Putney solicitor who became President of the Law Society.

But indeed the present Labour Party in the House of Commons is not a
class party.  It is a cross-section of the middle and working classes
with a few scions of the aristocracy thrown in.  In the Socialist
parliamentary party today there are over 200 of the professional
classes compared with about 119 trade union nominees.  Others, of
course, receive the support of trade union funds, but the net result
is a body far more independent than the party in the last Parliament
over half of whom were nominated by unions.  The average age is
forty-three as against fifty-six last time.

There are 40 lawyers in their ranks, 9 doctors, 19 company directors
or business men, 40 ex-service officers, 18 schoolmasters, 22
journalists and authors, professors, lecturers, economists, civil
servants and accountants.

So Attlee leads a national party with a national mandate, not a class
party with a class mandate.  He has the responsibility of restoring
and extending the basic security of two-party democratic government,
which is that both parties differ as to method but are united as to
aim--the welfare of all the people.

On the evening the Labour election victory was announced Mr. Attlee's
first words to the huge audience assembled to greet him were, "If
only Keir Hardie were here tonight..."  And Keir Hardie, the prophet
of British revolutionary Socialism, scorned the conception of the
class war which some of Mr. Attlee's supporters would foist on to the
Labour movement today.  "It is," he said, "a degradation of the
Socialist movement to drag it down to the mere level of a struggle
for supremacy between two contending factions."  His appeal was not
to the material interests of one class but to the moral conscience of
the nation.

The quality of Attlee's mettle will be tested not so much by his
dealing with the Opposition--mere weight of numbers will attend to
that--but by his success or failure in equipping the sound elements
of Labour with Keir Hardie's fighting faith which will enable them to
outmarch, out-think and out-manoeuvre the class-war boys within their
own ranks.

This task will take cold courage, hard thought and a fiery
conviction.  It will take all Attlee has given the nation so far--and
more too.

As Attlee himself says, "The attempt by one section of the community
to dominate all others inevitably means the adoption of terrorism as
a weapon."

Keir Hardie's challenge to Labour was the same as Labour's challenge
to society--the unselfish living and thinking which alone can finally
outlaw greed and hate and fear.  "Selfishness," he wrote in 1903, "is
not by any means a monopoly of the rich.  The same causes which lead
the rich employer to lower wages or the rich landlord to raise rents,
operate quite as freely with working men when opportunity and
self-interest dictate a like course."

So today Attlee's task is not only to deprive the privileged of some
things which for a long time they have regarded as "rights" but also
to show us ordinary, unprivileged masses that while we may have
"rights" we also have duties, and then inspire us to carry them out
in the interests of the nation.

As a Labour man said to me, "These days we either sacrifice our
selfishness for the community or sacrifice the community for our
selfishness."

The Prime Minister has the backing of all men of good will in his
adventures.  He may succeed or fail.  But one thing is certain.  If
he can restore to the ranks of British Labour the fervour and the
trust in God which upheld the early pioneers he will take a high
place in the pageant of human history.




CHAPTER FOUR

ERNEST IN WONDERLAND

_The Rt. Hon. Ernest Bevin_

The big danger of modern history is that men's living has not matured
so quickly as their thinking.

Canon B. H. Streeter, who possessed the largest-sized shoes and one
of the best-shaped minds this century has yet seen, once remarked, "A
nation which has grown up intellectually must grow up morally or
perish."

What did he mean by that?  The new atom bomb which in a second blasts
and mangles cities into nothingness provides an illustration.

Man's intellect has penetrated a secret of the universe.  Force
infinitely more powerful than any we have yet known is now unleashed
upon the world.  It is the result of the researches of many highly
developed minds.

How will men use this force?  That depends not on our minds but on
our morals.  It depends on whether or not the world has millions of
highly developed lives as well as minds.

Man with his atom bomb and his V1's and V2's can destroy himself more
effectively and swiftly than ever before--and he certainly will do so
unless there is rapid moral growth on a hitherto unprecedented scale
among the nations and the leaders of the nations.

For make no mistake.  Fear of the devastation fresh discoveries may
cause will never of itself keep man from war.  It never has done so.

I am brought to these reflections when I think of Mr. Ernest Bevin,
our Foreign Secretary.  What a colossal task falls to his lot and
portion in this day and age.  Being Foreign Secretary was not bad one
hundred years ago when communications were so slow that the man on
the spot had to bear the brunt of his own decisions without
consultation with Whitehall and when, if war happened, at any rate
women and children were secure.

But today every corner of the world is affected in a matter of
minutes by every mood of the Minister--and if a mistake is made and a
crash comes the very walls of civilisation crumble.  Yes, Ernest
Bevin has a tough assignment.

But Bevin will not quail at difficulties.  He is not the quailing
kind.  His life has been one of struggle, endeavour and usually of
ultimate triumph.

He began as a Somerset farmer's boy.  He was an orphan.  He was
eleven years old at the time and earned sixpence a week.  His boss
was short-sighted.  So he got the boy to read the newspapers aloud to
him.  This was Bevin's first introduction to the affairs of the world.

A retired Indian civil servant used to talk to the boy about lands
across the sea and sparked the imagination of Britain's future
Foreign Secretary.  One day with a few shillings in his pocket he set
off to Bristol.  He got a job as grocer's boy but was sacked at the
end of a month.

He drove a ginger-beer cart for a time.  Then he graduated to
tramcars and steered them around the streets of the mighty city of
Bristol where recently the University bestowed upon him an honorary
degree for his service to the state.

His first real chance in life came when Ben Tillett gave him a job as
trade union organiser in the old Dockers' Union.  He became known as
the Dockers' K.C.

He is sixty-four.  He smokes cigarettes and cigars and drinks in
moderation.  He is fond of good food although his tastes are simple.

Bevin is a born organiser.  His supreme test so far came at the
Ministry of Labour during the war years.  Many say that there he did
as much as anyone to help Britain to victory.  He accomplished an
immense job.  The best side of it was his faithfulness and feeling
for the ordinary folk from whom he sprang.  He has a real love for
the working-class fellow and a supreme respect for him.  True he made
mistakes.  And he made some enemies.  But nobody doing that job at
that time could have emerged without enemies.

At the same time Bevin showed himself unduly intolerant over any
opposition to his will.  He brushes it aside and beats it down.  He
whimpers about "pressure" if people stand in his way--yet he uses the
limit of his power in attempts to smash and destroy them.  Right or
wrong as they may be, they have dared to oppose him.  That is enough
to decide his mind.

In this respect he is very like Lord Beaverbrook.  One of them will
feel pleased, the other incensed at this comparison.  But it is a
true one.  The men hate each other--but in many respects are like
each other.

Both are tremendous human forces.  Both can be forces for good or
evil.  That is their choice.  Nobody can decide it for them.

Bevin says, "I have been in lots of fights and I never relied on
sympathetic action.  I made up my mind where I could win and went
ahead."

This attitude is to some extent inevitable in a man who has had to
fight as fiercely as Bevin against the massed material interests
which have tried to frustrate the advance of Labour over the last
fifty years.  Bevin's fiery and bullocking tactics, backed by the
quality of his mind, have undoubtedly brought benefits to tens of
thousands of the British labouring masses.

But Bevin is not fighting his way upward now.  He is on top.  The
battering-ram which has smashed its way through the wall risks making
itself ridiculous--and dangerous--if it continues to use equal fury
in open country.  And though from the personal point of view it may
pay to smash forward in the hurly-burly of home politics, such
tactics must eventually fail from the national point of view when as
Foreign Minister you are confronted by other negotiators who
represent the strength and will of an entire people.

In his job as Foreign Secretary Bevin can afford to avail himself of
a new grace and mellowness which will make him an historic figure
rather than merely a big shot of today.  He could be the man whom
hundreds of millions of inarticulate ordinary folk, Bevin's folk, the
whole world over are looking for.  That is, a reconciler of the
nations.

If he is to do it he must first learn to reconcile people in his own
nation.  At present he outrages so many people inside as well as
outside the Labour Party.  He cannot seem to help it.  Indeed he
boasts that he is the elephant who never forgets an injury.  But that
quality may not get him far forward in manipulating foreign affairs.

The fact is that for the first time in his career Bevin is in a job
which he cannot pull off alone.  He cannot succeed in foreign affairs
if he plays his habitual role of the single Colossus, the tough guy
who fights his way through.

For if he tries that on he will not only alienate some foreign
nations but also offend substantial sections of public opinion in his
own country.  And for this task in these days, so fraught with
promise and with danger, Bevin needs the whole British people back of
him all the time.

Britain's future depends on her sustaining in peace the moral
leadership in the world which she achieved in war.  To do this her
whole people must be inspired not by a Big I, but by a Big Idea.

In war it was comparatively simple.  Churchill's idea, "the Nazis
must be destroyed," mobilised the civilised world.  Foreign Minister
Bevin has a harder task.

He has clear insight into the problem.  The danger, he says, is that
"one kind of totalitarianism is being replaced by another."

And his solution?  "That very much overworked word democracy" must be
"defined."

Defined, yes--and all credit to the new Foreign Minister for thus
challenging the glib thinking of our time.  But definition alone is a
weak thing before the ideological passions which sweep the world
today.  Democracy will never be saved by definition, even when it is
backed by armed force.  The problem is to create democracies.  For
that, democracy itself must be re-inspired--and this can only be done
if it is infused by the spiritual power and moral purpose which gave
it birth.

If Mr. Bevin can rise to that task, he will have the entire nation
behind him.




CHAPTER FIVE

MAN OR MONKEY?

_The Rt. Hon. Lord Beaverbrook_

Like most other people I am prejudiced about Lord Beaverbrook.
Unlike most others who are prejudiced about him I know the man.

I worked seven years for him and most days during that time spent
hours in his company.  So I've had it.

I've had his boot in my pants and his bullion in my pocket.  I've had
him hit me with his fist below the belt and at the same time twist
his fingers around my heart.

Yes--strange, rich, powerful, intensely unjust and immensely lonely
as he is, I'm prejudiced about the fellow.  I love him--I love him
warts and all.  And so far nobody I've met can tell me worse about
him than I know myself already.

He is sixty-six and as full of energy as my skin is full of me.  When
I asked someone at the Tory Central Office the other day, "Who are
your men of the future?" he replied, "Well, certainly not Lord
Beaverbrook."  But Lord Beaverbrook himself may have to be consulted
on that point before it becomes official.

Beaverbrook fascinates his foes almost as the weasel fascinates the
rabbit.  They say Beaverbrook is far too clever to be good.

  "For alas, it is seldom if ever
    That people behave as they should.
  The good are so harsh to the clever,
    And the clever so rude to the good."


That about sums up the situation between Lord Beaverbrook and some of
his critics.

His Tory opponents blame him for losing the election.  They say he is
a bad man with a bad plan.  But bad plan beats no plan at all.  It is
at least an equal criticism to say of the Tory Party organisers that
they appeared to have no programme better than the one propounded by
Lord Beaverbrook to put before the nation at the last election.  If
they had a better hole presumably they would have gone to it.
Incidentally, if Lord Beaverbrook's advocacy did the Tories so much
harm you would expect the Socialists to like him.  But somehow some
of them don't.  It's the old story of the Two Black Crows, "Boy, even
if that were good I wouldn't like it."

Remember this about Beaverbrook.  He built the planes which fought
and won the Battle of Britain.  Nothing can take that from him.  When
Churchill said, "Never in the field of human conflict has so much
been owed by so many to so few," he could have added, "and one man
above all others made it possible."

Beaverbrook brought to the task the same piratical efficiency which
has left the pathway of his tumultuous lifetime littered with broken
friendships and burning loyalties.

Once early in the war a cargo of rare and invaluable machinery was
unloaded at a North-Western port.  It was earmarked for a Ministry
other than the Ministry of Aircraft Production.  It was an affair of
secrecy and extreme importance.  Nobody except the Minister concerned
and North-West port officials were supposed to know about it.

The Minister organised a fleet of lorries by telephone and sent them
to the dock to collect the machinery.  They were welcomed by blank
looks.  "Lord Beaverbrook's lorries were here and left two hours ago
with the stuff," they were informed.  And the stuff was used to build
planes for Lord Beaverbrook--the other Minister never got his hands
on it again.

Yes, an exasperating colleague, a maddening master--but the
Hurricanes and Spitfires took to the skies in time.

Beaverbrook is a man of grotesque changeability.  He is consistent
only in his inconsistency.

You find him one moment going in a meticulous and miserly fashion
through his household accounts.  Detail by detail those razor-like
eyes scan them.  "That bloody butler is cheating me....  Why do we
need bath salts?  Tell the housekeeper to chuck them out....  We're
using too many matches.  Cut 'em down."  Next minute he is writing a
five-figure cheque to help a friend out of debt.  He opposes state
control as national policy and thumps his tub daily on over three
million breakfast tables with cries for "Freedom" and "Liberty."  But
he keeps a tight grip on his own people.  He likes to have a hold on
the men around him and usually it is the control of cash.  He also is
a man to go to if you are in domestic trouble.  The role of confidant
and friend is one which immensely appeals to him.  Somebody once
offered me this piece of advice in my early days with Beaverbrook,
"If you want to get on well with Max get the police on your track or
start having rows with your wife."  And the joke was not entirely
serious.

Beaverbrook drives those who work under him so hard that they could
kill him.  Then suddenly he turns about face--and treats you so you
would follow him to hell (and some of his enemies suggest you might
not have to walk too far).  I have seen secretaries reduced to
tears--but they would never leave him.

One morning Beaverbrook told a fellow, "Whatever you do, remind me to
ring Lady So-and-So before you go home to-night."

"Yes, sir."

"Now don't forget, or I'll roll you in the mud."

"No, sir."

The day wore on.  Things did not go well.  By evening Beaverbrook was
in a rage.  He said to this man very quietly (Beaverbrook is always
at his most dangerous when he is quiet.  Think nothing of it when he
stamps and bawls), "See here, you.  Go out of this room and don't
come back till morning.  If you do I'll get mad."

"Yes, sir," answers the fellow gratefully.  "But before I go I was to
remind you----"

"Get out," interrupts Beaverbrook.

"But you told me-----

"I tell you to _get out_," says Beaverbrook in ominous tones, rising
from his chair and advancing upon the wretched being who thereupon
fled forth into the night.

Turning to me Beaverbrook then remarked in tones of mild
astonishment, "Did you hear that, Peter?  Why, it was attempted
_mutiny_."

Nothing delights the Baron more than a joke at his own
expense--provided he sees the joke, and likes it.  Once a colleague
of his, who usually found it simpler to let his views accord with
those of his master, was describing a ride on horseback to Percy
Cudlipp who now edits the _Daily Herald_.  "The horses come to the
door," he said, "Beaverbrook mounts and rides ahead like Napoleon
while I follow behind like Marshal Ney."

"Marshal Yea, you mean," retorted Percy.

This conversation, when relayed to Lord Beaverbrook, highly pleased
him.

One of his closest friends was the late Lord Castlerosse.
Beaverbrook disapproved of Castlerosse's first marriage and did his
utmost to persuade Castlerosse against it.  So he was delighted when
soon after it took place Castlerosse came to him and indicated that
things were not going entirely as he had hoped.

Beaverbrook put Castlerosse on the afternoon train at Victoria and
whisked him off to the South of France.  They had a happy week in the
sunshine.  Then Beaverbrook received the hotel bills.  He discovered
to his surprise that Castlerosse, who had been doing himself quite
well in the browsing and sluicing business in the public dining-room
with Lord Beaverbrook, also appeared to be consuming considerable
quantities of food and champagne in his bedroom at his host's expense.

"And by God, Peter," exclaimed Lord Beaverbrook, rocking with
laughter as he told me the tale, "I investigated and found that
unknown to me he had his wife up in the bedroom with him all the
time."

Lord Beaverbrook considers that the deepest mistake of his political
career was to accept a peerage.  He often pokes fun at the
aristocracy.  But the shrewdest comment on this viewpoint was made to
him by a young and beautiful lady at dinner one night.

Beaverbrook, apparently eager to impress her, was baiting various
aristocrats who sat with their legs beneath his table.  Finally he
turned to the girl and said, "Well, Mrs. So-and-So, what do you think
of all this?"

After a pause she replied, "I think that you joined the club of your
own accord.  They never asked you to."

Well, what is Beaverbrook's future to be?  What part can he play in
building the new Britain which my brother and our many brothers died
to achieve?  Mere disapproval of him is both silly and inadequate.
It is like disapproving of the Niagara Falls or of a rushing, mighty
wind.  You cannot dispose of such things by disapproval.

Beaverbrook is there, large as life and almost as handsome.  He is an
elemental force.  Where should that force be directed?

He probably cares for nobody in this world more than himself.  He has
won everything he has wanted in life--except happiness.

Today he has immense gifts to offer the nation if he chooses to do so.

He can achieve in the realm of character what he has accomplished in
the realm of cash.  If he began to practise in his own life and
publish in his newspapers the doctrine that we ought to behave as we
should rather than as we like, he could help to bring about the
Golden Age instead of the Age of Gold in which he has benefited
himself so handsomely.

He knows, of course, that he should do this.  He does not need me to
tell him so.  He learned it way back in Canada sixty years ago where
his Scottish father preached the gospel of Christ as a Presbyterian
minister.  But somehow he has got away from it.

He knows the Bible better than any other man I have met.  He has
large sections of it by heart.  Late at night he entertains and
enthrals chosen guests with stories from it.  But he usually repeats
the Old Testament, seldom the New.  Maybe because the New Testament
advocates that change of heart which would cost Beaverbrook so much
and bring him the reward which yet eludes him.

Someone has truly said, "It may be an act of faith to expect a new
world through a change of the human heart--but it is an act of lunacy
to expect one any other way."

One of Beaverbrook's old employees put his hand on my shoulder when
he was leaving Beaverbrook after twenty years of service and said,
"Peter, stay with Max.  He will lead the greatest crusade history has
ever seen--or he will die unhappy."

Well, we shall see.  Lord Baldwin believes that whenever Beaverbrook
falls ill he hears the flames of hell roaring for him.  I do not
know.  I cannot tell.  My hunch is that the Baron would like to
believe in nothing--but has unpleasant twinges from time to time when
he considers he may be wrong.

There is a story of a disbelieving old Scot who was not everything he
might have been.  He died--and found himself in exceedingly warm
circumstances.

With all his heart he felt remorse and cried aloud to God, "Father, I
didna ken it was a sin."

And the Lord looked down from Heaven and in His infinite mercy
exclaimed, "_Mon, ye ken it noo._"




CHAPTER SIX

HURLY-BURLY, BURLY PEARLY KING

_The Rt. Hon. Herbert Morrison_

People have often asked what happens when an irresistible force meets
an immovable object.  There is no mystery about it.  What happens is
a big bust-up.

This event took place in the declining days of the Churchill war
administration between Churchill himself and Mr. Herbert Morrison.
Here the metaphor ends--for while Morrison proved himself somewhat of
an irresistible force, organising the electoral victory which swept
Labour into Westminster on a flood tide, the legend of Churchill's
immovability was destroyed and he floated quietly away from the
anchorage at 10 Downing Street which had been his station through the
hurricane of the war years.

Churchill went to Lewisham in the course of the election campaign and
informed the electors there that Herbert Morrison was the colleague
above all others to whom he was least sorry to bid farewell.
Morrison, challenged by questioners, had alleged that Churchill was
responsible for no warning being given in relation to a bad Lewisham
bomb incident, and that consequently the casualties were needlessly
heavy.

The electors of Lewisham cheered Churchill--and then voted Morrison
to Parliament with a decisive majority.

By the drama of events, when the new House of Commons was summoned by
the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod to attend the House of Lords and
have the King tell them to get on with the job, Prime Minister Attlee
was absent at the Potsdam conference.  So Morrison as Leader of the
House and Churchill as Leader of the Opposition rose to head the
procession to the Lords.

Churchill glowered at Morrison--then jutted his chin and stumped
silently down the corridors of Westminster.  Morrison looked at
Churchill.  Then seeing the jut of that chin he set his own face
steadfastly before him and stumped doggedly and silently at
Churchill's side.

It is a pity that rancour should separate these two great
Englishmen--for such they are.  That word "Sorry"--so simple to
pronounce, so difficult to say, would put matters right.  And for
Britain's sake the sooner it is said the better.

I expect Churchill's indignation at Morrison may have had something
to do with the fact that Morrison did more shaking and less nodding
of the head to Churchill's propositions than some other Cabinet
colleagues.  A lot of the Labour men tell me that Morrison is the
only fellow they consider the equal of Churchill's calibre in their
party.

Whether Mr. Bevin would agree with this assessment I do not know.  I
cannot tell.  But time is on Morrison's side.  He is fifty-seven,
which is thirteen years younger than Churchill, seven years younger
than Bevin and five years younger than Attlee.

This burly, lively figure with the quiff of hair curling back from
his square forehead and giving him a look of perpetual enquiry is a
pearly boy--a true Cockney King.

His father was a Metropolitan policeman.  His mother was a housemaid.
He began life as a grocer's boy.  One day as he scudded along with
his parcels he saw a crowd gathered around a curious-looking
individual holding forth on the edge of the pavement.  It was a
street phrenologist.  He persuaded Herbert to part with sixpence and
have his bumps read.  After running his hands over Herbert's skull
the phrenologist said, "Not a bad head at all.  What do you read?"
Herbert pulled from his pocket something which used to be known as a
penny dreadful.

The phrenologist said, "You should read a lot.  You should read
better stuff than this.  With a head like yours you could be Prime
Minister one day."

Well, who knows?  Anyway this episode launched Morrison on a course
of serious reading.  He used to slip up to a room above the grocer's
shop when no errands were to be done, and the literature he read has
given him that clear, colourful and distinctive style of expression
which is a main weapon in his armoury today.

Herbert, like many a great man before and after him, was a failure at
his school.  He never won a prize and was often caned.  He was a
lonely boy and declares he spent much of his time sliding down the
banisters of a long staircase there.

He felt inferior to the other boys.  And certain physical handicaps,
over which in after-life he has triumphed, may have had something to
do with this.  For being lame myself I know that boys at school are
not always sensitive to the misfortunes of others.

Morrison has had from childhood a weakness of the ankles.  He has
said, "Sometimes I could walk, sometimes I could only crawl and
sometimes was in great pain."  Quite recently our Lord President of
the Council and Leader of the House of Commons had to have this
infirmity treated under gas.

Morrison also has a wall-eye.  His right eye is bad.  But he does not
miss much with the other one.

After his days as grocer's boy he got a job as shop assistant.  Then
he became a telephonist at Whitbread's brewery--and he found it
"heaven" he says, not because of the smell of hops but because it was
so peaceful.

Next he became a Brother of the Black Craft--he went into journalism
as deputy circulation manager of the _Daily Citizen_.  Like every
circulation man he thought he could write the copy better than the
editorial boys.  Unlike most circulation men he was probably right.
He had a flair for concocting advertisements (it comes out today in
the fighting slogans he coins for Labour).

Unfortunately for him, as he was on the point of getting transferred
from the circulation to the editorial, the _Daily Citizen_ expired
from lack of circulation.

Morrison thereupon took a £1 a week job as Secretary of the new
London Labour Party.

He has an immense asset.  That is his wife, one of the kindest,
warmest and most gracious of the ladies of Westminster.

They have a house in S.E. London--and they know that it takes a
little more than bricks and mortar to build the sort of homes we're
wanting in the new world.  As our Lord President of the Council has
said, "The Labour Party can never grow merely from an intuitive
thrust for more of this world's goods ... abundant life means
something far more than, indeed something essentially different from,
an abundance of material things.  It means more than bread and
circuses, more than minimums and movies."

The Morrisons have one daughter who married the son of Tom Williams,
our Minister of Agriculture.  They have all the simple-hearted gaiety
of unspoiled people when they are together, though to be sure the
hurly-burly of fierce electoral campaigns has made the husband
somewhat wary as he strides expectantly through the battle of life.

Their relaxation is dancing.  The Morrisons are always first on the
floor at any Labour Day dance.  And Morrison does not miss one dance
all through the evening.  With a grin of delight on his face, he
waltzes, foxtrots and veletas the hours away till dawn.

Labour holds his deep love and loyalty.  He says, "Whether it is in
alliance or whether it is alone, I am of it, for it, with it--and so
will remain."  He refused a salary of £7,000 a year offered him when
he was out of Parliament between 1931 and 1935, preferring to stay
secretary of the London Labour Party at £500 a year.

Some people declare that the policeman's son has somewhat of a
policeman's mentality on his own account.  They say he likes to boss
and bully, to regulate and control.  I am not sure whether this is
so.  True, in the course of the war it was his task as Home Secretary
and Minister of Home Security to operate many restrictions on the
liberty of the citizen.  But he showed immense political
courage--even though possibly some misjudgment as to timing--over the
release of Mosley from gaol, and at a moment when some members of his
own party from personal motives would have been glad to see him
embarrassed.  Morrison is more than a politician with both ears on
the ground.  He is a statesman with his vision on the future.  He is
gripped with a sense of destiny for himself, his party and his
nation.  He dislikes the idea of dictatorship wherever it emerges,
Left or Right.

He has said, "This is in large measure a war of ideas ... Out of
internal insecurity there would grow exaggerated nationalism, issuing
in policies of economic restrictions, 'autarky' and war ... Victory
of itself will not prevent the return of these things ... With what
guiding idea shall we approach the future?  For a guiding idea we
must have."

Of the extremists who try to capture the Labour Movement from within
and divert what began as a great spiritual and social crusade into a
sordid materialistic and class dictatorship, he said in December
1944, "Our own British Communist Party--if it is our own and
British--might at any time suffer a change of heart and go back to
bloody revolution.  For all I know it may be there already,
underground.  Anything is possible for a party which at one and the
same time shouts for a United Front and puts up candidates against us
with a view to splitting the Labour vote.  All this is alien to our
honest, straightforward, native, Socialist thought ... But you can't
all the time say 'No, No, No,' to the Communists.  The real answer to
the Communist is a positive answer.  We have to show more vigorous
fighting enthusiasm, more faith, more sense of high adventure."

Unlike many distinguished leaders of the Left Morrison is not fooled
by the Marxists, though he claims to be something of a Marxist
himself.  Unlike some who see the danger Morrison knows how to deal
with it.  But knowledge is one thing.  Achievement is another.

He sees that in the war of ideas which runs through this nation and
through the Labour Party today, the idea of the militant materialists
is more than a political theory.  It is a faith and a bad faith.  The
mistake that a number of men in Labour appear to make is the idea
that you can cast out a bad religion by a good political programme.
Not so.  It can only be cast back and out by a fiercer and better
faith.

Has Herbert Morrison got that faith?  Is he passing it on to others?

It takes a passion to cure a passion.  It takes a revolution to cure
a revolution.  The answer to materialistic revolution is the greatest
revolution of all time in the hearts of millions of ordinary men and
women who start to live for others and not only for themselves.

It may be Britain's destiny to turn back the tide of evil in the war
of ideas, just as she alone turned back the tide of evil in the war
of arms after it rolled across the rest of Europe to our very shores.

So Morrison can win a renown for himself in the war of ideas which
may even transcend in history the glory and importance accorded to
Churchill as a leader in the war of arms.




CHAPTER SEVEN

PERSONALITY OR PROPHET?

_The Rt. Hon. Anthony Eden_

Whether Mr. Anthony Eden was born in neatly pressed trousers has
never yet been disclosed.  Certainly it is hard to imagine him
otherwise than perfectly garbed and garnished.

His svelte figure, his handsome countenance and his smile have
adorned and cheered the way at the conference tables of many nations.
He gives altogether so charming an impression that some people
discount or even dislike him because of it.  They make the mistake of
supposing that charm is the handmaiden of softness and that such a
dandy must lack the rind and fibre to reshape an age.

They forget that some of the most delicate blades are forged from the
truest steel--and a willowy rapier will accomplish more than a mere
squat bludgeon.

But discussion about it and about will now end.  We shall soon know
the truth about Eden.  Until the 1945 election the lines had fallen
unto him in pleasant places and he had a goodly heritage.  Almost
without interruption since he entered public life the tide was with
him.

Today he is in opposition.  He is swimming in deep, rough waters and
against the stream of the public emotion which just now is running in
another direction.  So his quality will out.  If he is a mere dandy
he will soon submerge.  But if he is what millions of his countrymen
still believe him to be, a statesman of destiny, he will be seen
dauntlessly breasting the waters, swimming against the stream, giving
a lead, fighting every inch of heroic progress towards the principles
which his heart is pledged to establish in the nation.

What manner of man is Eden?  He is still young as politicians count
age.  He is forty-eight.  He comes from County Durham where his
ancestors have lived and loved and died since the fifteenth century.
He is the son of a seventh baronet, and the Eden baronetcy was
created by King Charles II in 1672.

His father was a most remarkable figure.  "Walk as though you own the
earth" was his motto.  He loved horses, flowers, painting and women,
hated dogs, children, other people's smoking and religion.  He had a
violent temper, and when he did not like the look of the plants in
his own green-house, smashed the whole place to bits with a walking
stick in a state of ungovernable fury.  Yet, curiously enough,
servants and gardeners were devoted to him.

When the rain fell as he and his guests waited to shoot pheasants, he
groaned out of the window towards heaven, "Oh God, how like You."

Amid such craggy surroundings the sensitive plant of Anthony Eden's
spirit pushed its way to maturity and gained precocious strength in
the process.

He was a very untidy boy and drove his father into tantrums with the
objects he scattered around the house and gardens.  It was hard to
get him out of doors as he preferred sitting inside reading history
and sticking his large collection of stamps into albums.

At Eton he won a prize for divinity, played football for his House
and was a good oarsman.  His housemaster says of him, "He was neither
taciturn nor gay with no special indication of an outstanding career."

He was caned for bad fagging.  One of the duties of fags at Eton is
to cook sausages and the discipline which he incurred through his
schoolboy shortcomings has turned Mr. Eden into one of the best
sausage chefs of Westminster.

He served with the King's Royal Rifle Corps in the first World War
and was nicknamed "The Boy."  He was brave in battle and went out
into No Man's Land to drag wounded comrades back to safety.  At the
age of twenty-two he was a brigade major.

After the war he went up to Christ Church, Oxford.  There he kept
himself to himself and slogged away at Oriental languages, for which
he won first-class honours.  He can still make an after-dinner speech
in Persian.  He spent his vacations in France studying French and his
appearance earned him the title of "Lord Eyelash."

He used to slip away sometimes from the spires and grey walls of
Oxford into the scented and slumbrous countryside which girdles that
ancient city.  There he would read poetry and paint in water colours.
He has considerable talent as a painter and is one of the best
English authorities on modern French painting.

He displayed to his few intimate friends developing ruggedness.  One
day a car in which he was driving passed a signpost.  A passenger
declared the signpost indicated a certain village.  Eden said "No."
After at least ten minutes' discussion in the course of which several
miles had been covered Eden insisted, in spite of the protest of his
companions, on turning round and going back to the signpost to prove
his point.

When the passenger who disagreed with him about the signpost said,
"After all, Anthony, what does it matter?"  Eden replied, "It matters
a great deal.  You are wrong and determined to make everyone else
agree with you.  That is bad for you and you must learn your lesson."

The year after he came down from Oxford Anthony Eden married the
daughter of a first baronet, Sir Gervase Beckett, the proprietor of
the _Yorkshire Post_.  He became one of the inky brethren like
myself, a Black Craftsman, and earned a living as a working
journalist for some time.  He concentrated on political articles and
notes on art exhibitions.

Almost as soon as he got into Parliament in 1923 Sir Austen
Chamberlain, then Foreign Secretary, made him his Parliamentary
Private Secretary and Eden was concerned with Foreign Affairs for the
greater part of the time until Churchill's Caretaker Administration
was beaten at the polls.

He is a shy man.  He trembles before he makes a speech and sighs with
relief when it is over.  He is shortsighted and sometimes offends
people by passing them in the street without recognising them.

In his large and ugly room at the Foreign Office, coloured with
brown, red and gilt, Eden appeared like a gay butterfly trapped in a
heavy and Victorian cage.

In the less formal atmosphere of foreign capitals his personality
appeared to blossom.  He used to play before-breakfast tennis at
Geneva.  Once at Rome Mussolini was showing him the buttons on his
desk.  "When I press the yellow one my Colonial Minister comes.  When
I press the green one my Foreign Secretary enters.  And when I press
the red one"--here the late Duce paused and jutted his chin like the
rock of Gibraltar--"a million men are mobilised."  Eden answered with
a grin, "Too bad if you wanted a sandwich and glass of beer and
pressed the red button by mistake."

In Sweden on a hunting expedition he astonished the newspaper
correspondent's of the world by refusing to shoot an elk which came
within range because he said it was so beautiful.

At a Berlin banquet Hitler told Eden they had fought in opposite
trenches on the Somme.  Eden made a drawing of the British position
on the menu and passed it to Hitler who sketched in the German
position.  Eden still treasures the card.

Yes, through most of the bumps and grunts and groans of inter-war
international relationships--the Spanish Civil War, Hitler's rise to
power, the Lion of Judah chased off his throne by the Bullfrog of the
Pontine Marshes, China invaded by the Red Star in the North and the
Rising Sun in the East--Anthony Eden sat manipulating the levers of
power which decide Britain's part in world events.

Anthony Eden resigned the Foreign Secretaryship.  He and his then
Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Lord Cranborne, went
out into the cold together because they disagreed with Chamberlain's
attitude to events in general and Hitler in particular.

It is a brave thing for a man to resign high office on an issue of
principle, especially when the policies of which he disapproves are
winning the general support of the public as Chamberlain's policy of
appeasement unquestionably did with the bulk of British opinion in
the year of Eden's resignation, 1938.

Yet it is a necessary part of democratic leadership which too many
Tory politicians have neglected.

The Tories over the last twenty years lost this conception.  And it
helped to lose them the election.  For the public began to think of
them not as disinterested statesmen but as folk with axes to grind
who considered they alone were equipped to wield power and would go
to any lengths to achieve it.

Eden has guts as well as charm.  In opposition he will have to rely
less on his charm and more on his guts.  He can reintegrate into the
ranks of Toryism that it is better to advocate an unpopular course
which you believe to be right than to win votes by advocating a
popular course which in your heart you believe is inadequate.

With his guts and flair Eden has a more important part to play in
opposition than he had in Government.  For he can equip the Tories
with a philosophy, if he finds it first himself.  When I was young I
read a book called, _Dr. Syntax in Search of a Wife_.  Now the title
should be _The Tory Party in Search of a Philosophy_.

They will not find it merely by competing with the Labour Party in
promises of national well-being, but by educating the nation to
recognise that our future as a power in the world depends not on the
community giving everything to every individual but in every
individual giving everything to the community.

This change, if it is to be cogent, must start in the ranks of the
Tories themselves.  Eden can set the pace for it.  Fires of
opposition and persecution can forge a prophet out of a picturesque
personality and drive him forward to a greater destiny.




CHAPTER EIGHT

THE CAT THAT WALKS ALONE

_The Rt. Hon. Emanuel Shinwell_

My brother John and I would tramp the hills together when we were
boys.  We would leave the grey city pavements and grey city hearts
behind us and go adventuring in the woodlands and wild places.

John, who now rests at Arnhem, loved the Highlands of Scotland in his
lifetime.  He would scramble the rocks and corries with the lashwhip
of rain upon his face.

He plunged his body into the black embrace of many an icy loch and I
would watch his white limbs a-glimmering in the water as he struck
out against the cold and later climbed ashore and scampered himself
to dryness in the wind.

We were anglers.  Many a happy day have we spent, while the shadows
of the mountains moved like ragged fingers across the valleys to mark
the hours away, bending patiently over the reaches and eddies of a
mountain stream to catch ourselves a dish of trout for supper.

We loved these hill rivers tumbling, circling, curveting through the
granite, rippling like muscles around the rocky ribs of the pool,
girding the banks with smooth strength on their power-ride to the sea.

Sometimes as we silently breasted a ridge startled deer would break
away ahead of us, moving like swift and effortless machinery across
the tangled landscape, pausing to glance back at us with a blend of
fear and fascination before they vanished up the glen.

One day in the heart of the mountains we came upon a deserted village.

Here were crofts neatly snuggled into the contours of the land.  Down
below was the remains of a wall and jetty where the crofters used to
launch their boats and land the harvest of the loch.  But the piers
were tumble-down and derelict, the doors and roofs and windows were
gone, the squares which had once been gardens were rush, reed and
heather.

Bracken and bog-myrtle spread lushly in the neat quarries where once
the peats had been cut to warm the crofter's hearth.

It was there that John and I heard first about the evictions, and the
cruelty of the tale affected my brother greatly.  It was one of the
things which influenced him in his deep sympathy with Labour.

The story of the evictions is simple.  Generations ago the landlords
of certain Highland properties decided that from their point of view
it would be more profitable to keep sheep on their hills than
tenant-crofters.  So they sent agents who evicted the crofters
village by village, men, women and bairns, from the homes where their
ancestors had lived for hundreds of years.

Today the wind sighs round the walls which once saw such human
suffering.  Rains wet the thresholds which once were moist with
tears.  But the ancient Highland villages are deserted and Canada,
Australia and many a far country have been enriched by the matchless
human material which the avarice of the landlords banished for ever
from our shores.

Just the same, though these evictions took place before anyone alive
today was born, the sense of grievance lingers on in the hearts of
many Highlanders.  For bitterness is a deep-rooted plant of swift and
stubborn growth.  The fruits of it are garnered for generations after
the seed is sown.

John and I met this same spirit in the mining valleys of the Rhondda.
There in the middle of the mountains, rivers and valleys of vivid
green, some of Britain's finest humanity was allowed for years to
rust away.

The miners are the salt of the earth, but many of them are as bitter
as aloes.  Their work is dark, hard and dangerous.  Since 1913 an
average of over 1,000 miners a year have been killed in British
pits--that is approximately three a day, seven days a week, Sundays
included.

In the first Great War the miners were treated like heroes, paid
large sums of money and told they were indispensable to the nation.
As soon as the war was over they were neglected.  Pits were closed
down.  Many miners went on the dole for five, seven and ten years at
a stretch.  Young fellows of over twenty in the Rhondda valleys and
other British coal-fields had never done a day's work in their life,
and that through no fault of their own.

Through the years of peace between the two wars 30,000 miners a year
were thrown on the economic dust-heap because they were no longer
capable of working underground.  That is approximately eighty-five a
day, seven days a week, Sundays included.  Eighty-five families a day
added to the total of human frustration and despair.

One of the most poignant memories I have is travelling in the bad
years through mining village after village where roadways and paths
were black and lined with silent men, their faces, hearts and pockets
empty, crouched there in their multitudes in the posture miners the
world over adopt when they are at rest.

They had sat there for years.  There was nothing for them to do but
sit.  They squatted like vultures waiting for death, in these mining
villages.  And it was their own deaths that they awaited.

One of them said to me as I offered him something to eat, "Are you
down from London?  A newspaper fellow?  They often come and look at
us--but they don't do anything for us.  I suppose there is nothing to
be done."

One of the strangest, saddest tales of the pits comes from
Lanarkshire in Scotland.  In the last century there was trouble in
these mining areas.  The miners, feeling they were underpaid and
exploited, went on strike.  The owners imported Polish miners to
break the strike.  They came in cattletrucks, some with labels around
their necks, most of them unable to speak English.  Today the
descendants of these men are valued Scots citizens.  They have
married and mingled their lot with the folk of Lanarkshire and are
themselves Lanarkshire folk.  But the legacy of ill-will between
miners and management which first brought their fathers to Scotland
persists.

Strangely the man who has been picked by Prime Minister Attlee to
carry out the nationalisation of the mines, the most revolutionary
economic change the industry will ever have seen, is himself of
Polish connection.  His forbears were Jews named Shinwald.  They
immigrated from Poland in the last century.  In the course of a
couple of generations the name has become Shinwell.

So I present to you Emanuel Shinwell, His Majesty's Minister of Fuel
and Power, born sixty-one years ago in London and one of the
toughest, ablest men the Labour Party has yet produced in Britain.
What I most like about Shinwell is his guts.  Life may get him down
but it will never get him under.  This quality makes him a powerful
champion of the oppressed.

The brightness of his brain shines out through his beady eyes which
glint and gleam like fire.

Political ambition?  I should say Shinwell possesses that commodity
in about the same measure as ninety per cent. of his Parliamentary
colleagues, and is more likely to fulfil it than most of them.  He
refused office under Churchill, but I am bound to say that the office
he refused was hardly big enough for Shinwell's abilities.

He is a fighter.  He started his working life doing odd jobs in
Leeds.  Then he was apprenticed to an East End tailor--if you want a
gent's natty suiting the Minister is quite able to measure, cut and
shape it to your needs.

He first made his name in the world of trade unionism by organising a
vigorous Seamen's Union which helped to improve the working
conditions of merchant seamen.  He got gaoled in 1919 for "inciting
to riotous conduct."

He is a man of revenge.  When Ramsay MacDonald, Shinwell's Socialist
leader, formed the first National Government in 1931 and Labour sank
without trace at the polls, as the _Morning Post_ wittily though not
altogether prophetically put it, Shinwell refused to join the
National Government and lost his seat in Parliament.  He was out of a
seat, out of a job and with little money.  His one ambition then was
to get even with Ramsay MacDonald.  He had to wait until 1935 to do
it.  Then he travelled to Seaham and fought Ramsay at the polls.

It was perhaps the most bitter battle of modern political history.
Ramsay was reduced first to incoherence, then to silence and finally
to tears by the savage and sustained violence of his opponent's
political invective.  Shinwell virtually bludgeoned his old chief out
of political existence.  Ramsay was never the same again after that
election.

Shinwell won the seat by an immense majority and has held it ever
since.

Once in Parliament a political opponent made what seemed to me to be
a highly offensive observation to Shinwell.  Peering down from my
seat in the Press Gallery I was interested to observe that Shinwell
appeared to take much the same view about the remark as I did myself.

He rose demurely from his seat, walked daintily up to where the other
Honourable Member, about twice Shinwell's size, was sitting and then
caught him a sharp crack on the mazzard which sent him to bed for
some days.

Shinwell prepares his political speeches out loud, walking up and
down a room declaiming at speed while a secretary pants to keep up
with him.  In the debating chamber he lolls on the front bench with
his feet on the Clerk's table.  He does not always seem to be paying
close attention to what goes forward.  But when he rises to reply he
seldom misses a point.  And if anybody else's speech contains
anything demanding retort Shinwell's feet leave the table at the same
moment as his body leaves the bench.  With a bound he is in the
battle, his eyes transfixing his opponent, his hand chopping the air
before him.

Now this man of fire has been given the job of keeping the home fires
burning and the big wheels turning while he resettles the economic
structure of Britain's mining industry.  It is a hard task.  But it
can be done.  Emanuel means "God with us."  Perhaps it is an omen.
Anyway, Emanuel Shinwell is better equipped than most men in the
Cabinet to do the job.

Nationalisation is the policy.  The public have demanded it at the
polls and are going to get it.  But that will not solve all the
problems of the industry.

For the bitterness is there, that titanic explosive of the human
heart which has wrecked empires, governments, nations and individuals
since time began.  No new system of itself will cure bitterness--but
only a new spirit.

An old, wise friend of mine once told me that the test of true
statesmanship is what you do with bitterness--do you cure it or do
you exploit it?  A militant minority in the pits of Britain have
worked hard for years not to cure the causes of the bitterness of the
miners but to extend and exploit these causes in order to win power
for themselves.

These men want power--and nationalisation of the pits will not give
it them.  They are the boys who sometimes urge the men to disobey
their accredited union leaders.  If he is to make the grade Shinwell
must win his fight with them as well as against the entrenched
positions of those who will try to delay the whole scheme of
nationalisation.  Otherwise coal which has been black diamonds for
Britain in the past will be black dynamite for her in the future.

Shinwell will make the greatest mistake of his career if he imagines
the mining problem can be solved by strokes of cleverness and
dictatorship coupled with an alteration in the organisation of the
industry.  Whatever system is established, the miners will be won and
the production of coal will soar only when an appeal is made to the
hearts of the best men in the industry and their faith and
self-respect are given back to them.  Then necessary reorganisation
will be profitable and effective and the ideas as well as the tactics
of the malevolent minority will be decisively repulsed.

For not only coal has to be mined from the belly of the earth, but
gold too from the heart of the mass of the miners--and the gold is
there for those who know how to reach it.  There are rich traditions
of comradeship, faith, character and teamwork in the pits.  The
ordinary miner will respond when he is treated as an honest man by
honest men, when he is shown that he has an essential part to play in
recreating the life of the nation and is not merely tolerated because
he is useful to the nation--when he becomes convinced he has much to
give as well as something to get.

By inclination Shinwell is somewhat of the cat that walks by himself.
He is not a team-man by instinct.  Yet if he tries to tackle the
mines on the basis of scoring a personal success he will find that
selfishness breeds selfishness, and that the mines will become the
wheel on which he is broken rather than the chariot in which he rides
to triumph.  If, on the other hand, he fights and works to build a
team among the best elements of the industry who will lift management
and miners to great living--then the mines will be his glory and the
glory of the Labour Government.




CHAPTER NINE

BIG BEN'S BABIES

Mother Time herself looks out serenely above Parliament at
Westminster.  Smiling her secret smile, viewing men and affairs from
the secure perspective of the centuries, she watches her children
come and go, make friends and enemies, win success or failure in the
corridors and debating chambers and committee rooms which spread
around her skirts beneath.

A sense of timelessness and history grips your imagination the first
time you visit Parliament.  Here the free men of Britain defied the
might of autocratic monarchy and sent King Charles I empty away when
he came to demand from Speaker Lenthall the names of five M.P.s who
had offended him.

Lenthall sank down on his knees to the King, trembling with terror.
But he bravely declared he could neither see nor say anything without
the leave of the House.  Charles went off having lost his temper--and
before long he had lost his head also.

That was the last time a British King entered the chamber of the
House of Commons.  To this day when the Gentleman Usher of the Black
Rod arrives at the House of Commons bidding the members attend the
King in the House of Lords, the door is slammed in his face as
demonstration of the people's sovereignty.  He has to knock three
times before he is allowed inside to deliver his message.

It was in Parliament that battles were fought to secure those
elementary principles of justice and fair play we now take for
granted and cherish as our inevitable birthright.

Here Shaftesbury, aristocratic and ill, racked by physical pain which
he could scarce endure and by personal ambition which duty enforced
him to deny, pleaded the cause of the children.  He made men weep
with his tales of boys and girls harnessed naked together
underground, underfed, underpaid, sick, bestial and exhausted,
dragging towards the daylight the coal on which the nation enriched
itself.

Here Wilberforce won the battle for the slaves though he had arrayed
against him the steely selfishness of a million human hearts.

Here came Keir Hardie in his cloth cap, with faith in his spirit and
fire in his belly, first of the few, pioneer for the majority.

Snowden with his acid tongue and hard head in the bitter, struggling
days of Labour--when some Tory paused in his speech to say, "The Hon.
Member smiles?"  Snowden pulled himself upright on his two sticks and
spat across the floor, "I did not smile.  I sneered."

Here the whole House was stirred by the aroused moral conscience of
the nation when another King, for so long the darling of the gods and
of the people, was forced to abdicate his throne.

Lloyd George rallying the nation through the bloodiest hour in
British history--Churchill radiating an unconquerable resolve when
the Empire stood in heavier peril than ever
before--Gladstone--Burke--Disraeli--Pitt--what a pageant of life and
glory and colour is woven into the Westminster tapestry.

So the new members of the new Parliament come crowding in to play
their part in history.  They are the great men now.  Perhaps it is
not so easy to believe it at first.  Many of them feel like Bonar Law
who, when he became Prime Minister, remarked to a friend, "If I am a
great man, then all great men are frauds."

It was a moving sight to see the new Parliament, the first Labour
working majority in British political history, assembling at
Westminster.  Simple people most of them were, excited at a great
adventure with wives and children tagging along behind them.  There
was a zest and comradeship about them, almost like the early days of
the I.L.P. which Mr. Attlee has described in these terms, "Its active
members brought to their task an apostolic enthusiasm.  It had
something of the quality of a religious body."  They were so
different from some of the plump, spruce, pickled, blasé and hardened
bunch which could be found among those who sat in the place from 1935
to 1945, men of all parties with the same hard look in their eyes.

What brings men and women to Westminster?  Disraeli, that
disgraceful, delightful old cynic, once enraged an elderly political
opponent by tapping him on the shoulder in the lobby and remarking,
"You and I know what brings us both here--ambition."

It is true, I think, that personal ambition plays a part in setting
many to climb the slippery slopes of a political career.  But the big
majority of new M.P.s, men of all parties, have a genuine and
heartfelt longing to benefit their fellow men.

Alas, not all of them emerge from their first spell of Parliament
with their illusions unscarred and intact.  So many have a picture of
themselves standing before a packed and cheering House making
speeches which shake the social fabric of the nation.  Outside the
evening newspapers are selling special editions with the latest
sentences of the speech in the Stop Press column, and a crowd of
citizens waits patiently in the roadway for a chance to show
appreciation to the great man as he drives away from Westminster.

But it is not like that for everybody.

There are 640 M.P.s.  In a big debate perhaps forty speeches are
made.  Of these, at least fifteen are reserved for the Government and
Opposition leaders and spokesmen.  That leaves twenty-five speeches
to be divided between 625 Members of Parliament, all eager to catch
the Speaker's eye.  When an M.P. does get a chance to speak, often it
is to row upon row of empty benches.  Seldom do more than forty or
fifty members listen to any but the big guns of the Parliamentary
debates.

It has been said that a soldier's life is nine-tenths boredom and
one-tenth fear.  But there is not even the one-tenth fear to spice
the existence of the average back-bencher.  He has to spend hours and
weeks of time sitting in the smoke-room waiting for the division
bells to ring.  He may seem the big shot to his constituents--he is
just one more vote to his party Whips.

Everyone knows that the hardest time to maintain morale is when there
is nothing to do but wait.  Politics at Westminster is a waiting
game.  That is why being a Member of Parliament is such a test of a
man's morale.

And the morale of Britain, the success or failure of the Labour
Government, will depend on what the new members do with their time
and their lives as they work the months and years away at Westminster.

It is here that a big battle in the war of ideas which settles the
fate of nations will be fought out.

What is this war of ideas which men like Herbert Morrison and Quintin
Hogg mention in their speeches?  Well, a war of arms involves armies.
The war of ideas involves faiths.

A war of arms is between nations.  The war of ideas runs through
nations, with men who talk the same language, live in the same
street, even belong to the same family fighting on different sides of
it.  A war of arms decides what nation shall be the boss, but the war
of ideas decides what idea shall boss the nations.  Whole territories
and nations can be occupied in the war of ideas as in a war of arms.
For instance, Hitler won the war of ideas in Germany before he set
Germany on the march.  He fired the whole of his nation with the idea
"My race shall rule" before a shot was fired in the war.  And he got
people in other nations fighting on his side too.

Similarly other large sections of the world are territories occupied
with such ideas as "My class shall rule" or "Money shall rule"--and
all these ideas have their allies in Britain to-day, bidding to
capture the allegiance of the ordinary man and of the M.P. eagerly
waiting to serve his nation at Westminster.

Now democracy's big idea is that "God shall rule in the affairs of
men."  It is from that idea, none other, that the conception of man's
equality and brotherhood springs.

But somehow the fire for that good faith of ours does not always
blaze in our hearts as fiercely as the hearts of other men blaze for
bad faiths.  For in the war of ideas as in a war of arms prisoners
can be taken.  I know because for years I was a prisoner in the war
of ideas myself--and almost without realising it.

This is how it happened.  It is a simple story and can be told in
simple terms.  I was brought up by my parents to have a faith in
God--and that faith meant much to me.

When I grew older I found that some of the things I wanted in life
were not always the things God wanted me to have.  I wanted my own
way, but it was not always God's way.

So as God's moral standards, which are absolute and changeless,
interfered with my way as I wanted it, I invented a moral code of my
own--and it was on a sliding scale as private codes of morals always
are.

There were always plenty of folk around to tell me what a good fellow
I was and to urge me not to be a spoil-sport.  Also I always had at
the back of my mind two or three people of whom I thought I could
say, "Well, at any rate I'm not as bad as them."

So I was captured by the enemy in the war of ideas.  Over things like
drink and women, over issues like honesty, purity and unselfishness,
I no longer let God have the right of way in my life.  Thus though I
wrote fierce newspaper articles in praise of democracy I myself quit
the only idea which makes democracy possible--God-control which fits
men for freedom by helping them to control themselves in the
interests of their neighbours.

I was so anxious to make a name for myself and money for myself that
I was not too particular how I did it.  I knocked my rivals down
instead of trying to build them up.  I struggled to become a dictator
in my own sphere.  I seldom said "No" to myself.  Thus when policies
like appeasement arose and there was a question of when to say "No"
to somebody else, my judgment was sometimes confused.

Then I recovered my faith in God.  Under His orders I put right what
I could put right.  I escaped from my prison in the war of ideas.

Now I have never been a Member of Parliament.  But I spent seven
years of my life as a newspaper man in the corridors and lobbies of
Westminster.  I can tell you that the methods by which I myself was
captured by the enemy in the war of ideas operate there quite freely.
There are influences at Westminster which try to make it easy for
others to go wrong.  For they want to capture Britain with alien
ideas--they do not want democracy's big idea of God-control to
triumph.  They know also that while absolute moral standards produce
clear-sighted statesmanship, loose living produces loose thinking.
And they do not want our legislators to think clearly and so see what
they are up to.

Once upon a time the private lives of Members of Parliament set a
standard for the nation.  Indeed it was impossible for a man or woman
with a spot on their moral record to hope for nomination as candidate.

If the new M.P.s--and the old--fight and win the war of ideas in
their own ranks, they will achieve something which no Parliament of
recent years has achieved.

The public life of Britain depends on the private lives of those who
run it.  That is where victory--or defeat--in the war of ideas begins.

People who believe a change of government by itself will usher in a
new age are doomed to disillusionment.  Only a change of heart can do
it.

For new governments adopt new and often necessary methods of dealing
with the symptoms caused by the selfishness of man.  But new hearts
go to the root--they cure the disease itself.

Britain's future rests on whether she makes _What Is Right_ the
strongest idea in the world.  She will capture the moral leadership
of the planet if she succeeds in this task.

And only those M.P.s who make _What Is Right_ the dominant idea in
their own lives can make it the dominant idea in the life of their
community.




CHAPTER TEN

BOBBETY

_The Rt. Hon. Viscount Cranborne_

For years successive Tory Governments were known as the Hotel Cecil.
That was because so many members of the House of Cecil had taken up
their abode inside them.  And indeed in almost any period of history
during the last 500 years a Cecil has been near the head of events.

In the reign of Queen Elizabeth Lord Burghley, the founder of the
fortunes of the House of Cecil, tried to trace his family tree but
could find no root stretching deeper down in time than the reign of
Henry VII.  At Hatfield, where the house of the Cecils spreads its
beauty and antiquity among the fields of the park, the tree under
which Elizabeth sat when told she was the Queen of England still
grows, a tough old oak braving the centuries like the family from
whose land it springs.

The present representative of the Cecils at the head of public
affairs is Viscount Cranborne, who was Secretary of State for the
Dominions and Leader of the House of Lords in the Churchill
administration.  He is the third successive generation of Cecils to
lead the House of Lords.  His grandfather, the Lord Salisbury who was
Prime Minister and who ended the political career of Winston
Churchill's father, Lord Randolph, by "snatching at his resignation
from the Chancellorship of the Exchequer as a dog snatches at a
bone," predicted that the House of Lords would be abolished after his
death.  Instead for nearly fifty years his son and grandson have
helped to pilot and preserve that institution.

And it plays a most important part in the legislative life of the
nation.  By and large the speeches of the Lords are far better than
those of the Commons.  For the men of all parties who warm the seats
there are not afraid of losing them.  They are in for a life-sentence
and so can freely speak their mind.  Also many of them have found
their own way to the top of affairs and have years of high
administrative or executive experience to contribute to the councils
of the nation.

Lord Cranborne is fifty-two.  He has a sharp countenance and a sharp
mind.  He is the soul of courtesy and good cheer with a high-pitched
laugh which makes you jump if you are not expecting it.  His eye and
heart are gentle--but his tongue is a sharp blade when he is provoked.

He is a varied orator.  Sometimes his hands dart like birds around
his body, he leans forward and establishes every point with the most
tense emphasis, thrusting his words defiantly before him.  At other
times he stands almost without gesture and conducts a speech as
though it were a conversation.

He went to Eton where he was nicknamed "Bobbety," then on to Oxford
where he played tennis well and was full of fun and good spirits,
being summoned and fined at the Oxford City Police Court for playing
a polo match with Prince Paul of Serbia on bicycles in the street.

When he was twenty-two he married a daughter of the House of
Cavendish whose courage, grace and insight have embellished and
adorned his path from that day forward.  He served through the Great
War in the Bedfordshire Regiment and Grenadier Guards.  After this he
got a job with a firm of bill-brokers in the City and did well at it.
He was known as one of the most cheerful men in the City of London.
In that dark place his smile dispelled the gloom and most bankers
kept some business for him.

One day somebody bet him he could not within half-an-hour leave his
Lombard Street office, run to the top of the Monument's 345 steps and
down again, climb to St. Paul's whispering gallery and return to
Lombard Street.  Lord Cranborne supplemented his income as
bill-broker by performing this feat and pocketing the wager.

In politics he speaks his mind.  This makes him dear to some and
dangerous to others.  This sturdy independence of spirit is part of
the family tradition of the Cecils where all divergence of views is
publicly aired and encouraged.  Thus when old Lord Salisbury, the
Prime Minister, was presiding over a tenants' supper one of his young
children sprang up and said, "I want to make it clear to everybody
that I do not share my father's political opinions."

Lord Cranborne, at that time Under-Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs, resigned with Mr. Eden from the Chamberlain administration
as a protest against the spirit of over-appeasement which he felt was
beginning to dominate our dealings with Hitler and Mussolini.

Lord Cranborne is one of the very few public men today who not only
takes an eager interest in Imperial affairs but also has a policy for
Empire.  Many lack even an economic policy for the British Empire,
let alone an ethical and spiritual policy towards it.  It may be one
of Lord Cranborne's contributions to Britain when in opposition to
produce a policy for the British Empire which will appeal to the
hearts of the British people.

For after all the British Empire is a fact.  It is there.  You cannot
get over it by debunking it or disapproving of it.  It is a vast
potential world source of good or of evil, of unity or disunity.  It
is up to us what we make of it.  The British Empire can become a
bulwark against the world force of materialism on the march.  It will
do so if the Mother Country performs the duties of a mother--and one
of those duties is to think of her children's welfare and to live
selflessly and ceaselessly for her family.

Soon after Mr. Churchill became Prime Minister he wanted Lord
Cranborne to become Viceroy of India, but Cranborne had to decline as
the doctors felt his health would not stand the climate.

Lord Cranborne is to my mind one of the most interesting figures in
British public life today.  He is like a fine piece of
nineteenth-century horseflesh among the twentieth-century jeeps.  He
is one of the few survivors of the old aristocratic rulers of this
nation.  The fact that he and the Cecils survive at all is the
interesting feature in the situation.  How do they do it in an age
where the privilege of birth and rank is becoming increasingly
outmoded and where so many aristocratic families only appear before
the public in the gossip columns and the divorce courts?

The aristocracy have to some extent lost their hold on the hearts of
the people because rightly or wrongly they have come to represent in
the eyes of millions a higher class of privilege but not a higher
class of conduct.  There was an old phrase "Noblesse oblige."  It
meant that if you enjoyed special privileges of birth and inheritance
you owed special duties to the society which gave them to you.  These
special duties were duties of moral conduct.

Some say that the British aristocracy has failed to adjust itself to
a changing age.  The House of Cecil shows this is a false picture.
The British aristocracy so long as it retains its tradition of moral
and spiritual leadership, which all wise men respect and would like
to see restored to the fabric of British society, is equipped for the
vicissitudes of any age.  Such leadership is always valid currency.
It is only when the British aristocracy departs from its best
traditions and lowers its standards that it becomes submerged in the
changes of an age.

Lord Cranborne believes there is very little difference in political
theory between the Right wing of Labour and the Left wing of Toryism.
In opposition it may be his task to draw the true battle line within
the ranks of his own party.  It lies between those who rely merely on
the traditions of the past and those who create the traditions for
the future, between those for whom Toryism is a political theory
which enables them to cling on to what they have and those for whom
it is a faith, a way of life which helps all men to give their best
enterprise and service to the nation.  Lord Cranborne has said, "The
English tradition of ordered progress is like a water-gate that
controls that flood and releases it in a steady flow for the service
of mankind.  We, with one brief exception, have never sought to sweep
away our ancient institutions.  Our aim has always been to add to
them....  We have never destroyed the old strong foundations built by
our forefathers.  That, I believe, is why we have survived when other
nations have crumbled into ruin."




CHAPTER ELEVEN

THE GHOST THAT WOULD NOT GO WEST

_The Rt. Hon. Sir Stafford Cripps_

A few days after the Labour party had so decisively beaten Mr.
Churchill at the polls I spoke to Sir Stafford Cripps.  He said to
me, "Some of our people say the battle is not yet over.  Why, the
real battle has yet to begin."  He added, "A lot of my friends are
afraid the Labour Government is going to move too far to the Left.
In my opinion the risk is that we shall not move far enough in that
direction."

I suppose that Sir Stafford meant that a party which wins an election
on a policy, and then runs away from it, risks being accused of
caring more for power than for the policy.

Sir Stafford Cripps, President of the Board of Trade, is the Ghost
that would not go West.  He is the corpse that refused to lie down.
In the dim, distant, dreamy days of 1939 the Labour Party expelled
him because as a member of their National Executive he circularised
local Labour parties trying to convert them to his way of thinking.
Many said that was the political death-knell for Sir Stafford.  But
he refused to be buried.  Like Felix the Cat he just kept on walking.

He went on a tour around the world and in a three-hour talk with
Molotov told him exactly what the common people of many lands felt
about the Soviet attack on Finland.  Within a short time the Soviet
Government asked for mediation to end that war.

Then he was appointed British Ambassador in Moscow.  Some say Cripps'
Moscow mission came a cropper.  Those who say that are his enemies.
Others say that at Moscow Sir Stafford reaped a crop.  Those who say
that are his friends.  I imagine the truth is that with the distrust,
suspicion and hostility which at that period filled the air in
Anglo-Soviet relationships no British Ambassador could have emerged
unscathed.  It needed events rather than men to influence the minds
of Moscow.  Be that as it may, it was during Cripps' mission in
Moscow that Russia went to war.

Some months after Hitler invaded Russia Cripps was recalled to
Britain.  Public opinion flung him towards the pinnacle of power.  He
was included in the War Cabinet as Leader of the House of Commons.
It is the first time for over a century that a man without a
political party has led the House of Commons.

Was Cripps a success as Leader of the House?  The answer must be a
shake rather than a nod of the head.  On this Cripps' friends as well
as enemies are agreed, though the friends are glum about it and his
enemies gleeful.  The House of Commons has that quality which
sometimes it regrets to observe in the public.  It hates being told
what to do.  Cripps told it.

Sir Stafford then went to India to settle the problems of that vast
sub-continent.  Like the dove from Noah's ark he flew across the
waters and, like the dove on its first flight, returned with an empty
beak.  But in India Sir Stafford did a brave thing.  After deadlock
had been reached it was suggested to him by a journalist at a press
conference that if he alone had planned the proposals they would have
been more acceptable to the races of India.  It would have been easy
for Sir Stafford to let it be assumed that opposing political
interests in the British Cabinet had tied his hands.  Instead he
frankly declared that if he alone had had the planning of the
proposals he took to India they would have been in every broad detail
the same.

In November 1942 he was appointed Minister of Aircraft Production.

He held that job until the break-up of the Coalition Government.  It
is said that Lord Beaverbrook did all the hard work at the Ministry
of Aircraft Production before Sir Stafford inherited his throne.  The
suggestion is that of Lord Beaverbrook's labour Sir Stafford reaped
the gain.  If this be so it shows considerable ability and astuteness
on the part of Sir Stafford.  Few men in British public life can
claim to have had such a rich association with Lord Beaverbrook.  In
any event, since Sir Stafford went to the Ministry of Aircraft
Production, though he has not enjoyed much limelight, his political
progress has been sure.  For with the aircraft he produced he did
something more than kill the Nazis so dangerous to us all.  He also
killed a legend most dangerous to himself.  The legend was that
Cripps was an ineffective intellectual, slick in his theories but
unable to carry the burden of administrative responsibility on a
national scale.  Yet, whoever may have laid the foundation, Cripps
successfully administered a key department during the most critical
years of British history.

What manner of man is Cripps?  He is lean, long and aloof.  He scans
life through quarter-moon rimless spectacles which follow the arch of
his eyebrows.  I saw him poised before the traffic on a Fleet Street
pavement at the start of this war, like a heron before a flood.

I said to him, "You will have busy days at the Bar now, Sir
Stafford."  He replied, "I don't think it is my job to carry on my
profession.  I'd rather do something to help win the war."  So of his
own accord he gave up a legal practice which was estimated to bring
him in £30,000 a year.  Even before war broke out he gave away the
bulk of his earned income.  He would budget with his wife for family
needs, children's education, housekeeping, travel.  The rest was
anonymously given for political and other purposes in which he and
his wife were interested.

He does not drink.  Offer him vintage port, dry wines of Rhine or
Moselle, the old ale of England or the yellow spirit of the North,
and he will say with a charming smile, "Do you mind if I take water?"

When he first entered Parliament in 1931 he saw the effect drink had
on some of our public men.  So he cut alcohol out of his life.  Once
he broke this rule with a draught of sweet champagne.  It was in
1941.  Then he clinked glasses with Stalin and Molotov in Moscow to
celebrate the signing of the Anglo-Russian treaty.

Smoking?  He puffs a cigarette, as Roosevelt did.  He draws a cigar,
like Churchill.  He used to smoke a cherrywood pipe, like Stalin.
But he has given up the pipe now except for an occasional suck at it.
Yet when I refused the smoke he offered me he wistfully exclaimed,
"You lucky man."

He springs from the soil.  He comes of yeoman stock.  His ancestors
had their roots in the West Country.

He is the ninth member of his family in four generations to be
elected to the House of Commons.  His father, three uncles, a
great-uncle, two great-grandfathers and his great-great-grandfather
sat in that citadel before him.

His father was given a seat by the Conservatives, a title by the
Liberals and office by the Socialists.  At a by-election in Wycombe
just before the last war Sir Stafford was helping his father to win
the seat in the Tory interests.  Into the committee rooms walked a
lovely girl, Isobel Swithinbank, grand-daughter of Mr. J. C. Eno, the
founder of Eno's Fruit Salts.

Hoping to win votes for the father, she instantly captured the vote
of the son.  They married one year later and the Isobel Swithinbank
of yesterday is the Lady Cripps of today.  They have four grown-up
children.

The two Crippses live in a two-room apartment in London.  They
prepare their own meals and wash their own dishes.  Since 1935 they
have eaten little except raw vegetables and fruit, salads, milk and
cheese, with an occasional boiled egg or potato as a treat.  Sir
Stafford picked up a bug in France where he was driving a lorry at
the beginning of the last war.  For years he suffered from intense
pain.  Then a friend discovered a diet in Tahiti which he persuaded
Cripps to try.  Cripps benefited.  He is still on it.  Lady Cripps at
first ate the diet with her husband to keep him company but nowadays
because she has come to enjoy it.

Sir Stafford also plunges his body into a cold bath daily.  Summer
and winter, tropics or arctic, it is all the same to him.  He did it
in Russia at the height of a Moscow winter.

He loves dogs.  In Moscow he bought an airedale and called it Joe.
Lady Cripps ended a cable from England "Greetings to Joe."  Then,
thinking of the possible political interpretation which might be put
on this by the censorship, she altered the phrase "Greetings to Joe
airedale."

Sir Stafford is interested in wild flowers just as Lord Baldwin was a
connoisseur of pigs, and Mr. Chamberlain studied the habits of trout
and wild birds.  Also, as Mr. Churchill is a first-rate bricklayer,
so the President of the Board of Trade is a front-rank carpenter.  He
once made a glider.  It glode--or whatever gliders do--but, alas,
disintegrated on landing.  He also fashioned a hand-loom and then
wove scarves for his children upon it.

He has a wide business experience.  In youth he set up a tea-shop and
sold tea at sixpence a head to his father's guests at Parmoor.  He
has also been a newspaper proprietor.  He was for five years in sole
charge of the business side of the _South Bucks Standard_, locally
known as Cripps' Chronicle, and it flourished under him.  He directed
a pottery works run by disabled men at Ashtead until the industrial
slump closed it down.  During the last war he was working in charge
of several thousand people at the largest high-explosive factory in
the British Empire.  He was concerned with the growth of this vast
undertaking from the moment the first sod of turf was cut.  Cripps
has the face of an ascetic and the hands of a mechanic, strong,
blunt, yet strangely sensitive.  In fact he is a scientist of
ability.  He was offered a chemistry scholarship at Oxford
University.  But his examination papers showed such a degree of
brilliance that Sir William Ramsay, the famous chemist, asked him to
study with him at London University and Cripps went there.

He is fifty-six, young for a man of his position and prestige.  He
takes immense pains over his public speeches.  He writes them out,
has them before him on small double-spaced typesheets, and uses them
as full notes to his speeches.  Not long ago he delivered thirteen
speeches in thirty-six hours.  Yet he suffers from orator's nerves.
His knees knock before his mouth opens.

He has been called a political innocent.  Well, in an age where
Guilty Men abound, Innocents are rare.  They shine like good deeds in
a naughty world.  Sir Stafford's innocence consists in believing the
faith which others of his party profess.

Once I asked him what he thought was the main need for the post-war
age.  He made a surprising answer.  "I think our first need is to
establish moral principle in politics.  We need fixed and absolute
standards of right and wrong, accepted by all, against which every
political action can be measured."

I asked whether he thought this moral principle of right and wrong
should apply to international as well as internal policy.  Cripps
replied "Yes."

Somebody once remarked that Christ was safe so long as you kept Him
locked up inside churches.  It was when you let Him out into the
world that He became dangerous.  Sir Stafford is one of those
uncomfortable people who believe Christianity is "do" as well as
"talk."  He debunks the easy theory that it is possible to couple
high ideals with low living.  He says, "We cannot be Christians in
international politics unless we are also Christians in our more
intimate and personal relationships and above all in our relationship
to God.  Do not let us lecture others on how they should behave
because none of us have yet learned to be wholly Christian ourselves."

Sir Stafford even goes so far as to think, in an age when avowed
agnostics and materialists sit in high places of the State, that
Christianity should find its way on to the statute book.  "Sell all
you have and give to the poor," but if you find this hard and it is
in the national interest for you to do so, a little drastic
legislation may be an encouragement.

I asked Sir Stafford whether he was in favour of the use of any
measure of force to establish Socialism.  He said, "Emphatically
no--and I never have been."  I then enquired what is his positive
answer to the Marxist philosophy which creeps forward within the
ranks of Labour.  He replied, "Well, the short answer to Marxism is
that Marx was wrong.  For one thing a vast new class, the middle
class, has been created since he wrote _Das Kapital_."

Here let it be said that this answer underlines the greatest weakness
Sir Stafford Cripps has as a politician.  He thinks it is adequate to
demonstrate with cold logic that he is right and that other people
are wrong.  Not so.  When somebody tells me I am wrong it tends to
make me mad, not different.  Cripps has yet to learn that it is
possible to win your argument and lose your man.

Sir Stafford lacks practice in spotting wolves lurking under
lambskins.  He sometimes forgets that there is a war on--a fight to
the death between the forces of selfishness who are out for control
and use political manoeuvre as a tactical weapon, and the militant
force of a new spirit at work in men and nations.

Yet Sir Stafford Cripps has special qualities that should enable him
better than most of his colleagues in the cabinet to appreciate and
grasp this struggle.  His knowledge of the Bible and his own
Christian experience could give him accurate diagnosis of men and
motives and illumine much that is obscure in the contemporary scene.
He could have the fighting faith to enlist the statesman and the
ordinary man, whatever his political convictions may be, on the right
side of the moral battle line.  For the impact of mind on mind and
life on life is the very thing that is needed to bring Sir Stafford's
dreams for a new world into practical effect.

Those who know him best declare that recently the ingredients of the
Cripps character are altering.  The ice melts, say they, the fire of
secret convictions develops a quality at which the world can warm its
heart.  I am told that this statesman who refuses to accept human
nature as something immovable but believes that its basic destiny is
advance and change, himself is changing.

If so, it will be a change into something rich and strange.  It may
make history.  For Cripps is a man of destiny.  He is one of the few
men who could give this nation the sustained, disinterested and
inspired statesmanship which alone will float us through the
hurricanes of peace.  Mere optimistic bluff which we are offered in
such abundance will never do it.

Cripps has ambition, but I should say he is not entirely gripped by
it.  His personal future means less to him than the future of the
nation.  From that very fact he is bound to impact events, whatever
his personal fortunes prove to be.




CHAPTER TWELVE

DIAMONDS IN THE DESERT

  _The Hon. Quintin Hogg_
  _Mr. Hugh Molson_
  _Mr. Peter Thorneycroft_
  _Viscount Hinchingbrooke_

The ostrich, when it has received a blow on the head, instantly
buries that organ in the sand and foolishly waits until it receives
an additional crack on another more convenient portion of its anatomy.

Contrariwise the formidable pelican, when it has been caught napping
in the sunshine by an enemy, opens both eyes widely and rapidly
scuttles to a new position or even takes to its wings and is airborne
in order if possible to avoid another beat on the bonnet.

One of the most fascinating aspects of British public life right now
is the sight of the Tory Party making up its mind whether it will
behave in defeat like the ostrich or the pelican.

There is a considerable school of thought in the Tory ranks which
believes in something called the swing of the pendulum.

The best expression of this idea which I have seen appeared in the
_Review of World Affairs_ which says, "The landslide which has now
occurred may turn out for the best in the end.  In due course the
great law of reaction will once again operate and will sweep some
national front party back to power, probably at a time when it will
be much easier to govern than it will be during the next two or three
years."

This beautiful thought presupposes that the famous pendulum has
reached the limit of its Leftward swing.  But supposing it has not?
Supposing the vote for Labour at the last election represented a
resolve that never, never, never again were the people of Britain
minded to choose the theories which Toryism over the last twenty-five
years has presented to the nation?

In that case, if disillusionment with Labour sets in and the Tory
Party does nothing to change its ways but only waits for fate to
return it to power, the people may move yet further Left where a
militant philosophy of life is ceaselessly being propounded for them.

The Tories need a new programme if they are to survive.  It will come
by change, not by chance.  That is where the Young Tories can play
their part in the future of Britain.

Did you ever hear tell of them?  They are without doubt a most
interesting feature of public life today.  They are the sparking-plug
of Conservatism.  They shine out like diamonds in the desert.  At
present they number approximately forty seats on the Opposition side
of the new Parliament.  Some of the ablest men who represent the
Conservative interest at Westminster are among them.

This crowd came together in February, 1943.  They believe that
Conservatism should represent a new philosophy of national change,
unity and progress, not a mere hunger for "the good old days" and a
desire to attack the Socialists.  They think that the spirit of the
Eighth Army, of fellowship, teamwork and shared sacrifice for a great
cause which rose above party, class and creed can be carried by
Britain into the peace years, and indeed must be so if we are to
survive as a prosperous and powerful nation.

The Young Tories have something in common with the Fourth Party which
raised Lord Randolph Churchill, the father of our former Prime
Minister, to glory and greatness.  The Fourth Party sat together,
supported each other in debate, and always defended each other with
bite and barb if one of their number were attacked.  They provided
much the most effective opposition to Mr. Gladstone in his heyday of
prestige, just as through the war years the Young Tories were more
effective than the official Socialist Opposition on the occasions
when they opposed the Churchill Government.

The Fourth Party used to play on Mr. Gladstone's vanity.  One would
rise and thank the Right Honourable Gentleman for his most able and
remarkable speech.  But there was one part which no doubt through his
own stupidity was not yet plain to him.  Would Mr. Gladstone please
explain it?

Mr. Gladstone, much pleased by the courtesy of his young political
opponent, would rise and reply at great length.

Then another member of the Fourth Party would demand enlightenment on
some further point.  And though his own Whips plucked at his
coat-tails and begged him not to be lured by those rascals, the Grand
Old Man would once more stand up and make a sonorous and prolonged
discourse.  So again and again the Fourth Party induced Gladstone to
talk so much that there was no Parliamentary time left to vote on
legislation which he had planned and which they detested.

In this day and age the Young Tories have made themselves masters of
Parliamentary manoeuvre and exploit each political situation to the
utmost with real insight and finesse.

They have much in common also with the young crowd of Tories which
Disraeli gathered around him on his road to power.  For though not
agreeing with each other on every detail of a political programme
they have deep personal loyalty.  They are capable of kindling and
holding affection in others.

Thus Disraeli captured the imagination of Lord Charles Bentinck, a
man whose passion was horse-racing, who appeared at the House of
Commons late at night in muddy riding clothes and who had never made
a speech in Parliament.  Bentinck was so stirred by Disraeli's vision
of what a public man could do for his country that he sold all his
racehorses, risked his popularity in London society by defending the
Jews who at that time were under fire, and worked so hard studying
blueprints and making speeches that within a few years he dropped
dead from exhaustion in a field of turnips.

Bentinck became sleepy after eating.  He decided that he would eat
nothing at all until late evening so as to stay awake during the
debates in Parliament.

And while I do not believe any of the latter-day Young Tories have
taken such extreme decisions, they do bring to public life a genuine
enthusiasm which has been uncommon, at any rate on the Tory back
benches, for some years.

Incidentally it is worth remembering that both the Fourth Party and
Disraeli's Young England group made their first and biggest impact in
opposition.

One of the liveliest of today's Young Tories is the Hon. Quintin
Hogg, M.P. for Oxford City, thirty-eight years old, and with one of
the swiftest brains and sharpest tongues in Britain.  He fought
against Hitler and was wounded.

When he was appointed Under-Secretary for Air in the Caretaker
Government he remarked with much glee to his friends, "It is
wonderful at the Air Ministry.  For the first time in my life, when I
press a bell, something happens."

Quintin has the face and heart of a boy.  He is untidy and
irrepressible.  He is a most lovable companion.  He delights to mount
on a bicycle, put his hands in his pockets, and pedal along like an
errand boy, whistling blithely.  He rejoices in the simple things of
life like food, hard work in the open air, and the love of friends.
He rolls up his sleeves and helps his beautiful wife with the cooking
and housework.

And yet with all these amiable qualities, it would be idle to pretend
that Quintin is universally beloved.  He has a temper which he has
not fully mastered, and a wit like a rapier at which he himself
laughs immoderately while the victim withers.  He is an up-and-down
fellow.  One day he bubbles like champagne.  The next he is flat as a
pancake.  He has days and hours of glory alternating with hours and
days of gloom.  I have noticed that the things about which he becomes
most indignant are not always those about which in his heart he feels
most deeply.  His approach to most political problems is penetrating,
vivid, but intellectual.

His intellect is, I fancy, a shield which he uses to protect his
heart from hurt.  It hurts less to expose your mind than to expose
your feelings to the world.  Yet millions will be moved by
heart-appeal who are left cold by an appeal to mere reason.

If Quintin gives his heart to the world and fights sustainedly and
publicly for the highest things he has seen, he will become one of
the mightiest revolutionary forces in this generation.

Chairman of the Young Tories is Arthur Hugh Elsdale Molson, Member
for the High Peak division of Derbyshire.  He is forty-two and
unmarried.

His father was a soldier and he was destined to be a sailor, but
after studying at the Royal Naval Colleges of Osborne and Dartmouth,
changed his mind and went to Lancing and New College, Oxford, instead.

At Oxford he became known as "Hot Lunch Molson" because whenever his
friends were eating a snack of bread and cheese about midday Molson
would excuse himself with the remark, "I can't do without my hot
lunch."

One of Molson's relatives put the first steamboat on the St. Lawrence
river.  Another developed our export trade by introducing the
Canadians to British beer.  He has travelled the world, descending
coal mines in South Wales and India, silver mines in Burma and gold
mines in South Africa.  To crown his adventures a land mine fell not
far from him during Hitler's blitz on Britain.

So unlike the average run of Tories is he that the _Daily Mirror_
once lauded him for his "keen social conscience"--and who should be a
better judge of such matters than the _Daily Mirror_?

Molson is a fighter.  When as a Parliamentary candidate he made some
speeches critical of the administration, Tory officials in his
division endeavoured to raise a revolt against him.  Molson called a
full meeting of his association, insisted on a vote of confidence in
his political activities which was carried by 255 to 68 and then made
the revolutionaries apologise for their commotion.

Another Young Tory is Peter Thorneycroft, aged thirty-five.  He was
in for Stafford.  Now he is out on his ear.  But he will surely be in
again.  His future is all before him.  And he will be active in
preparing Tory policy for the next election.  He is a glittering bird
of paradise, in the direct line of the tradition established by the
late and great Lord Birkenhead, faultlessly turned out, suave,
colourful and dangerous to his enemies.  He served with the Royal
Artillery during the war.

He is a beagler.  When he takes time off from politics he girds
himself in short trousers and stout shoes and hunts the hares across
the arable land with little dogs (hounds to you, sir) called beagles.

He carries a sharp sword with which he means to carve out some
golden, glittering prizes from life, and also a razor with which to
slit the soft white throats of his opponents.

He sips a wine with the air of a connoisseur.  He comes from a long
line of blacksmiths, the Midland ironmasters who have contributed so
much to the wealth and power of Britain in this industrial and
warring age.

Thorneycroft is sure to rise to the head of affairs.  He is doomed to
success.  And doomed is the word because his temptation is to make
personal success his main objective.  In the long run this is ever a
source of weakness for a man or nation.

Like some other Young Tories he has a public school shyness concealed
behind his man-of-the-world assurance.

Yet if he found a living, fighting faith which made him constantly
seek larger than his own, his qualities could swiftly set the nation
on fire.

My last Young Tory is Lord Hinchingbrooke, thirty-nine years old,
M.P. for South Dorset, heir to the Earl of Sandwich and in some ways
the most remarkable of the bunch.  He is tall, quiet and extremely
good-looking.  He thinks before he speaks and he knows how to listen.
These are rare virtues in public life today.  He served in France in
1940.

Beneath an aristocratic and somewhat frigid exterior there beats a
heart which loves humanity and is ready to fight for it too.  You
feel as you talk with Hinchingbrooke that public life for him is
service not gain.  He is of the quality and tradition of the great
aristocratic reformers like Wilberforce and Shaftesbury.

If he learns to articulate in words and ways which the ordinary
fellow can understand the ideals which mean most to him, he will live
in history.

Lord Hinchingbrooke said to me, "The Conservative Party should stand
not for the betterment of one section of the nation at the expense of
another, but for the whole nation.  It should offer a marching
philosophy and faith, based on moral principles, which makes all men
fit for freedom.  The test of democratic statesmanship is to draw the
best out of people and help all men to give more voluntarily for
their country than they would give under any system of compulsion.
Universal state control simply means the failure of policy--you
expect the worst from people, have never taught them to give to the
state instead of get from it and so have to enforce patriotic action
upon them.  In the immediate future we should trust the people--give
them as much freedom as possible.  But stern controls should be
applied to any section of the community which by its selfish or
foolish attitude risks the welfare of the whole."

Now am I, Peter Howard, a Young Tory?  Alas, I am not so young as I
used to be.  As for my relationship with the Tory Party, it is very
much the same in terms of affiliation and practice as Lord
Beaverbrook's relationship with the Scottish Presbyterian Church.

But this thing I know.  The Tories must develop a new philosophy, or
die.  The country is unlikely to swing back that way unless it senses
change.

The Young Tories can provide dynamic to the whole Conservative cause.
First of all they need a love and understanding of the ordinary man.
For good or ill, Labour has succeeded in convincing the ordinary
fellow in the street that Labour loves him.  Have the Tories done
this?  When you talk with some Young Tories sometimes you have the
sense that for them in their politics men sometimes cease to become
men, creatures of blood, bones and feelings, brothers under God, but
develop into figures in a ledger, ciphers in a plan or mere potential
voters at an election.

Second, the Young Tories can provide their party with the flame of a
moral purpose.  This at present the Tories lack.  There is more talk
of political principle than of moral principle in their counsels.
The difference between moral and political principles is this--moral
principles do not alter; political principles are often shifting and
degenerate to political expediency.  That is why so many folk
distrust Toryism today.

The Labour Party stands for work, houses, food.  Yes.  But man cannot
live by bread alone.  He needs that extra incentive to satisfy his
hunger for great living, to turn his heart from Get to Give.

The Tories will develop the historic heritage of Britain and her
contribution to the world if they now decide to live this truth
themselves and make it available for all the people.




CHAPTER THIRTEEN

GENTLEMEN AND PLAYERS

  _The Rt. Hon. Hugh Dalton_
  _The Rt. Hon. Arthur Greenwood_

A week or two before the 1945 election results were announced I met a
tall, stooping figure strolling in slow and melancholy fashion in the
shadow of the houses along the pavement of a London street.  His nose
drooped upon his chin and his chin rested upon his chest.  He
appeared the embodiment of grief and woe.

It was the Right Honourable Hugh Dalton.  "Who has won the election?"
says I.  "Churchill, I'm afraid," says he.  "He will get a majority
of seventy or eighty seats.  Of course, Labour will win next
time--and we'd have done so now if it had not been for the old man's
personality."  (By "old man" he meant that eternal and boyish, even
schoolboyish spirit Winston Churchill.)

Two days after the results of the election were known and Churchill
had resigned I met Dalton again.  He certainly looked different.  His
chest, chin, nose and heart were high.  Those curious attractive pale
blue eyes of his were sparkling with fight.  He briskly crossed the
street in the sunshine with the large sombreroesque headgear that he
fancies set at a cocky angle on his domed skull.  The news of his
appointment as Chancellor of the Exchequer had been published that
morning in the Press.

"Well, my friend," says he, "amazing things have happened since last
we met.  The people have unmistakably told us what they want--and we
must give it them."

"That is so," says I, "and you have a tremendous job on your hands."

The Chancellor of the Exchequer then spoke with a simple and deep
humility which touched my heart.  "We need everybody's help now,"
said Hugh Dalton.  "All people of good will of every class and every
party will have to help us if we are to do what we have been trusted
to do."

This appeal to the whole nation, not one section of it, is typical of
the sound heart of Labour.  For the best elements in the ranks of
Labour, though they do not all see how to beat the class-war boys,
recognise that we cannot establish a classless society by declaring a
war of extermination by one class on another.  They know that the
right way to unity is by enlisting men of every class and background
in a crusade for a common cause.

Typical of this conception is the team Labour has picked to work
together over the building of houses for the people.  Two of these
men are Dalton and Greenwood.

Dalton will be called upon to provide the money from the Treasury.
Greenwood, as Lord Privy Seal, will supervise the bricks and mortar,
the man power, brain power and will power necessary to launch the
biggest construction programme any nation so far has undertaken in
this sphere.

From what different backgrounds these two men spring, and what
contradictory and complementary talents they bring to their task.

Dalton is sprung from the Church, Greenwood from the Chapel.

Dalton was born in Wales and nurtured in the South, Greenwood leapt
from the rugged womb of Yorkshire.

Dalton's father was Canon of Windsor and helped to educate Queen
Victoria's children.  Greenwood's father was a painter and
decorator--the boy himself rose in the world to get one of his first
jobs teaching at different Yorkshire elementary and secondary
schools.  When Dalton was enjoying a youth of purple Greenwood was
tramping from workhouse to workhouse, disguised as an ordinary
casual, investigating the workings of the Poor Law.

One of Dalton's earliest recollections is of an elderly lady patting
him on the head and offering him grapes.  It was Queen Victoria.
"Will you have _more_?" she said in tones of some astonishment.
"Yes, Queen," boomed the small boy in that loud, echoing tone which
he carries with him to this day.  "That child has a voice exactly
like his father," remarked Queen Victoria with some asperity to her
lady-in-waiting.  She sat under Dalton senior in the Windsor Chapel
for prayers.

Greenwood too has hobnobbed with Royalty.  He was friendly with the
Duke of Windsor at the time when that nobleman was Prince of Wales,
and used to share breakfast on trains with him when one was going
about his political business and the other on his way to hunt with
some pack in the shires.

Incidentally, it is quite a legend that members of the Labour Party
dislike Royalty.  On the contrary, most of them are the loyalest of
the King's subjects.  And they value their touches with the Royal
household.  Why, we might never have had the _Queen Mary_ built at
all had not David Kirkwood buttonholed the Prince of Wales in the
cloak-room of Lady Astor's London house and urged him to interest
himself in the project for the sake of the then unemployed ship-yard
workers of Clydeside.

Both Dalton and Greenwood are men of exceptional intellectual
attainment.  Greenwood has a phenomenal memory--European history,
economics, social legislation and a mass of statistics on most
subjects under the sun.  Dalton was educated at Eton and Cambridge,
won prizes for his research work, was called to the Bar and became a
lecturer at the London School of Economics after serving throughout
the last war on the French and Italian fronts.

Dalton is mostly abstemious but puffs at a pipe.  Greenwood smokes
cigarettes.

Greenwood finds it difficult to say "No" to himself--and to others.
Dalton finds it harder to say "Yes" to anybody.

Dalton has had to put up with a measure of suspicion in the Labour
movement on account of his aristocratic background.  This makes him
cautious and calculating.  At one trade union conference, when I was
reporting the affair for Lord Beaverbrook and was therefore looked
upon askance by some of the delegates, Dalton said to me quite
seriously, "Yes--I think I am sure enough of myself to be seen around
with you now."  He is so wary that he tends to be over-anxious.

Greenwood on the other hand is so open-hearted that he is sometimes
not cautious enough.  He has a spirit wide open to a world which
sometimes takes an unfair advantage of it.  Many a time and oft I
have seen him sitting round a table singing songs and swapping
stories with newspaper men who were out to harm him if they could.

Both are men of courage.  Neither is scared of hitting a political
enemy when he is standing up and I do not believe either would desert
a friend when he was down.  Greenwood, I know, though by no means a
rich man, has opened his purse again and again to those fallen on
evil days.

Dalton moves slowly and deliberately on his way.  Only his eyes roll
from side to side scanning the passers-by as he advances.  Greenwood
strides rapidly ahead, thrusting his head this way and that and
shouting to his friends.  He used to run up the steps of the Ministry
of Health so briskly when he was in office there during the last
Labour Government that the staff of the place nicknamed him "Sunny
Jim."

Both are men of considerable administrative experience.  Dalton held
posts at the Ministry of Economic Warfare and the Board of Trade
throughout the Churchill administration.  In a sense Greenwood can
claim the parentage of the Beveridge plan.  Way back in the first
World War he lectured on social problems covering housing, industrial
movements, insurance and so on.  These lectures were the basis of his
reports to the Labour and Capital Committee of Reconstruction.  For
twenty years they lay under dust-sheets in a Government office.  Then
when Churchill asked him to become Minister of Reconstruction
Greenwood called in Sir William Beveridge and asked him to make what
use he could of these old reports.  So the Beveridge plan was born.

Dalton is a first-rate parliamentary orator but not always so much at
ease with a large working-class audience.  Greenwood with homely word
and blunt phrase goes straight to the heart of the masses.  In
Parliament he sometimes stumbles and falters, though the finest
speech of his life was made in Parliament on the eve of the war
against Hitler when both sides of the House cried "Speak for
England"--and from that strong, deep Yorkshire heart Greenwood did.

The two men hold in common a loyalty to Attlee, their chief.  At one
time or another both have been spoken of as potential leaders of the
Labour party.  It would have been easy for either of them, and
especially for Greenwood during certain periods of the recent past,
to have manoeuvred a forward path for themselves.

Neither has done this.  They have been loyal to Attlee in public.
What is even more important, they have been loyal to him in private
also.  They have backed him through the tempest and they back him
still.  Not all the men at the top of Labour can make this claim.

Now these two men, from different backgrounds, of different tastes,
inclinations and temperaments, yes, of different classes, work
together unitedly in a common cause.  Both are gentlemen in the best
sense of that term and both are players.

Now they can integrate a new conception into the public life of
Britain.  That is the conception that the secret of great living is
not to push your own claims all the time but to live to make the
other fellow great.

Greenwood and Dalton, the first nurtured in the Wesleyan Chapel where
so much of the true spirit of Labour was born, the second cherished
in his childhood by the Church which has fitted many of England's
noblest sons for leadership, can themselves set the pace for the
whole community to return to the strong, simple truths of selfless
citizenship they learned at the knees of their mothers.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN

BRITAIN'S BROWN-EYED BOY

_The Rt. Hon. Sir David Maxwell Fyfe_

His irises are a delicate shade of vandyke brown.  But he is the
blue-eyed boy just the same.

After the Labour avalanche swept into Westminster I made an enquiry
at Palace Chambers, the headquarters where the Tory organisers sat
scratching their heads and licking their wounds.

"Who are your young hopefuls now?" says I.  "_Definitely_ Sir David
Maxwell Fyfe for one," says they.

Sir David is Tory M.P. for the West Derby division of Liverpool.  He
is forty-five.  At that early age he has been His Majesty's Solicitor
General and His Majesty's Attorney General too.

He has Napoleon's sallow complexion, penetrating gaze and burly
figure.  If he were not so distinguished a gentleman you could
accurately describe him as plump.  He has an uncanny memory.  Not
long ago somebody asked him at dinner about an obscure legal point.
Without a second's hesitation he reeled forth the reference in
Halsbury's _Laws of England_ including details of the volume, page,
footnote and sub-section.  The walls of his London dining-room are
lined with books and, unlike most folk who own hundreds of volumes,
he has read and remembers almost all of them.  By way of relaxation
he devours one shocker each week.

He takes a large size in hats but he is not too big for his boots.
He is a simple man.  Last time I dined at his home he said to me, his
face beaming with delight, "We have managed to find somebody to wash
up for us tonight, so we can have a holiday."

His story is the age-old romance of the poor boy who makes good.  He
is a Scot.  His father was an inspector of schools who wrote books
and poetry.  His mother was a Campbell of Sutherland.  They spoke
eight languages between them.

Young David was educated at the famous George Watson's College of
Edinburgh.  It was founded over 200 years ago for the children of
Decayed Merchants and for the sons of Ministers of the Gospel, though
under which head David Maxwell Fyfe comes it is hard to say.

He was just old enough to serve the last year of the 1914-1918 war in
the Scots Guards.  Then he went up to Balliol College, Oxford.  It is
typical of the man that at a time when the fashion was for all
intellectuals to be Red or Pink he became a True Blue Tory--Treasurer
of the Union and of the Oxford Carlton Club.

He was called to the Bar.  He had no money at all.  He asked a High
Court judge for advice.  The judge said, "Go West, young man.  Or
rather, go North-West.  London is not the place for people who are in
a hurry."

So Maxwell Fyfe took the train to Liverpool.  It was a brave
decision.  He knew nobody there and had no local connection.  By the
age of thirty-four he became a King's Counsel.  He is formidable in
cross-examination.  Cold as ice and with a mind like a Spitfire, he
extracts truth relentlessly from the most reluctant witnesses.  He
prepares his cross-examinations with meticulous care before he gets
to court and seldom asks a question without knowing what the answer
will be.

By way of contrast, he does not spend much time on concocting his
political speeches, unless he has to make some official pronouncement
of Government policy.  In this he differs from men like Gladstone who
used to spend hours on a sofa "wombling" his big speeches over inside
him.

Fyfe is a family man.  Nineteen years ago he married Sylvia Harrison
of Liverpool.  Her brother is Rex Harrison, the actor.  She couples
beauty with great-heartedness, intuition with commonsense.  She is a
remarkable woman who plays a part in each stage of her husband's
advance to greatness.  Wives have often been an immense reinforcement
to successful statesmen.

Lady Fyfe takes her husband to his work each day and fetches him home
again each night.  She cooks and darns and mends for him.  She buys
his clothes and has great difficulty in persuading him to discard his
old ones.  "He is an immense worker," she said to me.  "Once, when
the blitz was on, bombs fell all round our home.  I got frightened
and went in to the room where he was working.  He said to me, 'My
dear, this is a most interesting point.  Come and see if you can help
me with it.'  He had not noticed the bombs at all."

The criminal who has been transfixed in the witness box by the cold
rapier of Fyfe's mind, the politician who has been bowled out by the
accuracy of his reply might be surprised if they visited his home
that same evening to find the Member for West Derby on his hands and
knees under the dining-room table making animal noises at his
youngest child.  Three daughters have been born to the Fyfes.

Home life means much to him.  Indeed, he is one of the few men in
public life today who are convinced that it is a priority need for
Britain that as much thought and energetic action be now given to
rebuilding the home life of Britain as to rebuilding the houses which
the bombs have knocked down.  "Homes are the assembly line of
national character," he says.  "They are the cement of nations.  When
homes crack, nations crack.  A citizen who learns to be unselfish in
his home will be a selfless, patriotic unit in the nation."

He is engaged in writing a life of Spencer Perceval, the Unknown
Premier of Britain.  Perceval held office from 1807 to 1812, the
years when Britain turned the corner in the Napoleonic wars, and then
was murdered by a lunatic in the lobby of the House of Commons.  He
was a respectable family man with thirteen children.  "Perceval was a
real organiser of victory in the Napoleonic war," Sir David tells me,
"but because he lacked the vices of Fox he did not get the attention
he deserved from the publicists of his age."

It is worth while remarking that Spencer Perceval's first job in the
Government was that of Solicitor General, six years before he became
Prime Minister.

Sir David Maxwell Fyfe has a wide knowledge of policy.  He is
Chairman of the Conservative Party Central Committee on post-war
problems.  The investigations of this committee include education,
agriculture, industry, housing and demobilisation.

He is a Tory by conviction and yet he is by no means an implacable
party man.  From his own experience he has a profound desire for
brains and character rather than birth and privilege to be the key to
positions of power.  "An open road for the best brains," he once
described as an objective of social policy.  "I believe in getting
seventy-five per cent. of what I want with the consent of eighty-five
per cent. of Parliament, rather than fighting everybody because they
won't yield everything that I want," he tells me.

He is an optimist for the future.  "I do not consider that post-war
slump and depression is inevitable," he says to me.  "We can avoid
it.  But whether we do so or not depends as much on the people as on
the politicians.  I know this is an unpopular thing to say, but just
the same it's true.  We can make the best plans in the world, and we
are trying to do so, but it takes people to operate plans.  The years
immediately after the war will be difficult years.  Sacrifices will
still be necessary.  If everybody is on the 'get' every plan will
fail.  But if we all decide to continue to give our best to the
nation in peace as in war then we shall win the peace as well as the
war.  Men need a moral urge, if that expresses what I mean, to show
them how to continue to live greatly for their nation instead of for
themselves after the danger of war is removed."

Sir David Maxwell Fyfe is a planner.  Planners are not popular with
everybody.  But Sir David is a planner with a difference.  He never
looks on men as mere figures in a ledger or labour as a mere item in
a balance sheet.

He has had much to do with the drafting of the social legislation
embodying so many proposals from the report of Sir William Beveridge.
He is the backroom Beveridge.

In the previous century the Tories attempted to secure a major
parliamentary triumph by adopting the measures of their political
opponents.  "They caught the Whigs bathing and ran away with their
clothes," as Disraeli described it.

Well, Mr. Churchill's Coalition Government tried to do much the same
thing with that latter-day Whig, Sir William Beveridge.  I suppose
the legislation recently drafted by Sir David Maxwell Fyfe and passed
through Parliament is one of the most comprehensive schemes of social
reform offered to any nation in any age.  Every individual is
affected by it.  But most folk know very little about it.

What is the future of a man like Sir David Maxwell Fyfe to be?  That
he will play a big part in the political life of Britain is certain.
It is within the range of possibility that he will do more than that.

Begbie wrote of Britain at the close of the last war, "The need of
the nation was not for a great political leader but for a great moral
leader....  Under the public show of our national life the heart of
the British people was famishing for such guidance."

A friend of mine in America was asked about the qualities which
contribute to such leadership.  He replied, "Four F's--Faith, Fire,
Facts and Filosophy--if you'll pardon the spelling."

Sir David Maxwell Fyfe, young in years, rich in experience, has three
of these F's.

He has Faith.  He has Facts.  He has Filosophy.

But he needs Fire.  It is there, but it smoulders instead of blazing.
The coldness of intellect which is the strength of his judgment is
sometimes the weakness of his presentation.  He captures the minds of
men, but not always their hearts.  He has yet to burn so constantly
for Britain that he sets great audiences and communities aflame.

A spell on the Opposition bench may give the fire.  For Sir David has
one lovable and unusual quality in a successful politician.  He is
humble enough to be ready to learn.

He is at the threshold of new depth and wide development.




CHAPTER FIFTEEN

THE TRUE BATTLE LINE

Certainly to the bewilderment of the mass of the British people and
possibly to the bewilderment of himself, Professor Harold Laski
became a centre of controversy at the 1945 election which gave power
to Labour.  Laski, speaking as Chairman of the Labour Party, had
declared that if Attlee accompanied Churchill to the Potsdam
conference he would have no authority of his own and if he made any
decisions there then the Labour Party would not be bound by them.

After the election Laski went to Paris.  There, according to the
French Press, he announced what he described as the British
Government's attitude to Greece, Yugoslavia, America and China,
suggested that the French should cut off commercial dealings with one
of their neighbours and told them how they should vote in the
elections shortly to be held there.  (Incidentally, I wonder what
Laski would have said if the Chairman of one of the United States
political parties had made a speech urging Britain to vote for
Churchill, immediately before our general election.  Laski would have
been outraged.  And Laski would have been right.)

While Laski continued his tour to Copenhagen and Stockholm, Mr.
Attlee administered a rebuke to him in the House of Commons,
indicating that decisions on such matters would be taken by His
Majesty's Ministers and not by His Majesty Laski.

But the Professor made one pronouncement in the flush of electoral
victory which has far-reaching significance for the future of
Britain.  Laski said that it was Labour's task at the next election
"to end the Tory Party as we have ended the Liberal Party at this
election."

If this is to be taken seriously, and certainly many of Laski's
admirers take it seriously, it would seem to mean the establishment
of one-party government in Britain.  Is that Britain's democratic
aim?  Or is it the aim of doctrinaires who are out for power for the
sake of power?

This is the same silly and wrongful attitude on the Left as emerged
on the Right when Labour was hard hit in 1931 and its days as a
mighty and evolving political force seemed to be numbered.

But it is not democracy.  Think of the days of Gladstone and
Disraeli, when our democratic institutions were strong and Parliament
commanded the respect of all the nation.  True Gladstone and Disraeli
lived in an age when a name for political grandeur may have been won
more cheaply than now.

Perhaps their statesmanship was cast in too slight a mould to contain
the vastness of some problems which today confront us.  Certainly
their period of history was one in which grave social injustice
existed in the midst of extreme wealth, and this wrong state of
affairs was largely accepted by both parties.  Nobody would want any
suggestion of a return to those bad old days.

Yet though it can be argued by latter-day pundits that neither
Gladstone nor Disraeli had the flair for statistics, blueprints,
plans and economics which many public men today possess, both these
men had certain qualities which are necessary to a healthy, or even a
surviving democracy, and which are becoming rare in public life now.

Gladstone and Disraeli disapproved of each other and even distrusted
each other's political integrity.  Their opinions of method were
totally opposed.

Yet in a larger sense they were united.  For each knew there were
things far more important than their personal power or the power of
their party.

Their home life meant everything to them.  After difficult days the
stately and puritan figure of Gladstone could be seen in the privacy
of his drawing-room dancing before the fire with his wife and singing
with her,

  "A ragamuffin husband and a rantipoling wife,
  We'll fiddle it and scrape it through the ups
        and downs of life."


Mary Ann used to stay up until the early hours of the morning to
welcome Dizzy home--she would run from room to room lighting the
candles so her tired man felt welcomed and warmed as he came back
from Westminster.

Mrs. Gladstone and Mrs. Dizzy visited each other and were on friendly
terms in the days when the stark rivalry between the husbands
developed and the debates grew tough.

Britain with her traditions and above all the character of her people
meant more to these two men than personal advancement for themselves
or cash benefits for the citizens.

The freedom of the Parliamentary institution, the liberty of the
individual and the function of the Opposition--all these things they
cherished and neither would use his power to curtail them however
advantageous to himself and his party it might be.

Above all, religion was the basis of both their philosophies and
united them on moral standards however far they might diverge on
political expedients.

This faith was common to both parties and to the men of all parties.
It gave them common standards of public and private conduct.  It was
in the spirit of this unity that democracy and two-party government
worked.

It is also why the form of parliamentary government, when
transplanted to other countries, did not always work so well.  It
failed in Italy and in France where the form but not the faith was
accepted.

France had no Wesley, but only a Rousseau.  Italy was given a liberal
constitution by Cavour, but this liberalism carried with it a spirit
of licence which undercut the Christian faith from which true
liberalism sprang.  The fruit was without the root and shrivelled
swiftly away.

In America democracy has succeeded because the Christian faith was
exported there first and her own democratic institutions have sprung
from it.

Now in the British Parliament today men on both sides can be found
who agree with this truth.  Indeed the majority would agree if it
were pointed out to them.  But all are far less conscious of it than
they were in the days of Gladstone, Disraeli or even Keir Hardie.

And a new element has entered in.  Materialists on both sides of the
House, a resolute minority opposed to the whole conception of
Christian democracy and determined to do away with the Christian
heritage which has made Britain all she is, are articulate and near
to the seats of power.  They plan, fight and manoeuvre towards their
objective.  They are encouraged by the godless dictatorships of Left
and Right which have gained power in Europe over the last quarter
century.

So the true battle line in Parliament today is not between Left and
Right but between the sound elements in both who fight for Christian
democracy and the materialists in both who fight for personal power
and class control.

At present the materialists are outnumbered by the sound elements but
outmatch them in both resolution and clamour.  They see more clearly
the battle line, they know where they are going and ceaselessly fight
for their objective.

The whole cause of constructive democracy in Europe depends on a
working demonstration in this island.  So many elements in Europe are
wavering and waiting.  Some will go to the extreme Right, some to the
Marxist Left unless they see here the working model of a democracy
which provides each side with the stability, balance and positive
qualities that come from the spirit of faith.

Such a demonstration here might magnetise the potentially sound
elements of both Left and Right throughout the continent, and then
Britain could as decisively rally the forces of true democracy in
peace as she did in war.

And the fire of a fighting faith once more kindling, warming and
illuminating the councils of the nation would destroy for ever one
danger which threatens our democracy--that is the danger of
disillusionment.  Parties which tie themselves to a mere programme of
material promises sooner or later become discredited.  People fed on
promises always demand more and are never fully satisfied.

Soon they may become disillusioned with all public figures.  Then the
Strong Man steps in.

But parties committed to a faith and a philosophy, something which
offers man more than bread alone to live by, something which
satisfies his hunger for great living as well as for a good time,
such parties never engender disillusionment even in the bad days of
difficulty and hardship, for their hold is on the hearts not merely
the pockets of the people.

Begbie wrote of the political situation which followed the last war,
"Was there ever a greater opportunity in statesmanship?  After a
victory so tremendous, was there any demand on the generosity of
men's souls which would not gladly have been granted?  The long
struggle between capital and labour which tears every state in two
might have been ended.  The heroism and self-sacrifice of the war
might have been carried forward to the labours of reconstruction.
The wounds of Europe might have been healed by the charities of God
almost to the transfiguration of humanity."

Last time we let that chance go by.  Shall we again?  The penalties
of failure are so much heavier today than they were yesterday.

Transfiguration?  It is a strong word.  It means change, which is
something more costly than sacrifice.  Change for leaders--and for
led.  For we as well as they are on trial.  Democracy itself is on
trial.  A change of heart rooted in Christian faith is alone adequate
to usher in the greatest revolution of all time whereby we shall ride
the storm, not be ridden by it, and remake the world to the pattern
our dead soldiers desired and our children look for.




CHAPTER SIXTEEN

MAN FROM MISSOURI

_President Truman_

_This chapter was written* in the week that President Truman
succeeded to the White House, and is included here because he too is
a man on trial._


* In "Everybody's Weekly".  The author is indebted to the Editor, Mr.
Greville Poke, in whose paper four of the chapters in this book
appeared.


Let us now praise famous men.  So sings the prophet.  But let us not
succeed them.  So whispers the politician.

It is hard to take over a job where your predecessor has made a
success.  If you fail, your failure is more marked by comparison.  If
you succeed, men say you are merely reaping the fruits for which your
predecessor planned and laboured and sowed.

And I suppose few men in history have been harder to follow than
Franklin D. Roosevelt.  That is the task destiny has laid on the
shoulders of Harry S. Truman.  When he heard the news he said to
reporters, "Did you ever have a load of hay or a bull fall on your
back?  Well, I feel as if the whole moon and stars had fallen on
mine.  If any of you boys pray, I hope you'll pray for me now."

What manner of man is Truman?  Some pressmen depict him as a simple
and almost obscure figure, lifted by a series of accidents rather
than by ability into perhaps the most important executive job of the
modern world.  That is a false picture.

It is true that office has sought the man, not the man office.  Yet
in his own right Truman has qualities of conviction and statesmanship
which can make him one of the greatest of American Presidents if he
follows his star.

The new President is as slow as ploughing and as inevitable as
harvest.  He is an American of Americans.  "If you shake my family
tree, almost anything may fall out," he has remarked.  Scottish,
Irish, Dutch and many another blood runs in his veins.  So he
reflects in his own personality the genius of American history, which
has been to welcome men of every tongue and nationality and to mark
them with the common stamp of a single nationhood and loyalty.

There is only one compromise in Truman's life.  That is the letter
S., which is his middle initial.  What does the S. stand for?
Nothing at all.  One grandparent stood over a cot in May 1884,
looking at the squalling scrap which was destined to become
thirty-second President of the United States and declared, "I want
the boy called Solomon."  The other grandparent glared at him and
remarked, "Shippe is the name."  In the end they agreed to skip it,
and the boy was named plain Harry S. Truman, so both sides of the
family could fill in anything they liked after the S.

Truman is from Missouri (pronounced Mizourah).  In the States they
have a saying, "I'm from Missouri.  I've got to be shown," which
means that folk from Missouri believe things when they see them--but
not until.

The new President is the son of a smallholder.  He was raised on the
farm.  His mother, now aged ninety-two, said a year or two back,
"Say, I knew that boy would amount to something from the time he was
nine years old.  He could plough the straightest row of corn in the
country.  He could broadcast wheat so there wasn't a bare spot on the
whole field."

Like Abraham Lincoln, Harry Truman has tried his hand at many jobs in
his time, and has been more successful at some things than at others.
He has been clerk to a chemist, timekeeper in a newspaper office,
bank clerk, farmer, haberdasher and odd-job man.

Like Lincoln, his venture into shopkeeping was a failure, and like
Lincoln he scraped and saved for years until every creditor was paid.
He was still paying off debts when he was elected to the Senate.

Like Lincoln, too, he fought for his country.  But unlike honest Abe,
who used to say that his fighting in the Black Hawk war consisted of
"a good many bloody struggles with mosquitoes," Truman was directing
his artillery battery until one minute before the 1918 armistice.  He
ended up a major.

Coming home again, he didn't find life easy, and for a time knew real
poverty.  So he has an understanding of the hopes and fears of the
returning soldier, for he was once a returned soldier himself.

Then fortune knocked at his door.  Politics in Kansas City at that
time were dominated by the notorious Pendergast machine.  Pendergast
himself ended up in gaol after making a fortune out of politics.  But
before that he was looking for somebody without enemies.  His eye
fell on Truman, who thereupon was nominated to a local judgeship.

It is a remarkable tribute to the personal integrity of the new
American President that although he owed his start in politics to one
of the most shady political machines in the States, not even his most
resolute enemies--and he has enemies--fail to give credit to his
honesty and blameless personal record.

By 1934 Truman had become a United States Senator.  He worked away
industriously but without becoming a front-rank national figure.

Then, in 1941, before America entered the war, Truman felt restless
about the efficiency of the industrial programme to help Britain.  He
made a 35,000-mile trip across the country at his own expense,
inspecting countless factories and army installations.  Back in
Washington he said, "It doesn't do any good to go around digging up
dead horses when the war is over.  The thing to do is to dig this
stuff up now and correct it."

The Senate agreed, and the Truman Committee was born.  Within six
months he was front-page news in every paper in the States.  Without
fear or favour he exposed incompetence, extravagance and waste
wherever he found it.  It has been calculated that he saved billions
of dollars and thousands of lives by the skill and persistence of his
investigation.

He did not spare the most powerful industrial interests of the
States, nor the Federal departments themselves, from the corrective
of his reports.  And as he travelled the land he did two things.  He
obtained a grasp of the facts about American production which led
newspapermen to say of him, "His knowledge of the war set-up is
second only to that of Roosevelt."

And he displayed a remarkable capacity for conciliation.  Wherever he
went he was able to draw the best out of both management and labour,
because both sides trusted him.

He analysed the set-up in American industry in words which are worth
studying today by all who have the trends of the post-war age at
heart.  Truman said, "A battle for control is going on in many of our
major plants.  Most management and labour in the country want to
co-operate to win the war and build a lasting peace.  But there are
extremists in both camps who don't make the job any too easy.  They
represent an alien philosophy of conflict and so play into the hands
of foreign ideologies....  There is only one answer to this sort of
thing.  We must start now to draw the battle line in American
industry between the responsible and constructive forces in both
management and labour against the small but active minority who
believe in a finish fight."

Harry Truman prides himself on being an ordinary man.  When a friend
of mine congratulated him on his election to high office he replied,
"Now see here, Harry's my name.  I'm a simple fellow and I live at
Independence, Missouri.  You know the place.  Push open the door and
step right in to see me any time you are passing."

He gazes out at life from grey eyes through steel-rimmed spectacles.
He combs his grey hair flat and neatly sideways.  He does not smoke,
but very occasionally sips a glass of bourbon whisky with ginger ale
as a chaser.

He is a mighty reader.  All through his life he has devoured books.
He loves military history and probably knows as much about the
details of the American Civil War as any living man.  He wanted to go
to a University but his folk could not afford to send him there.  So
he has educated himself with books.

He loves music, likes crooners as well as the classical composers
(Chopin is his favourite), and occasionally plays duets with his only
child, twenty-one year old Mary Margaret.

He enjoys poker, but will play only for small stakes.  This pleases
his friends because he usually comes away the winner.  He has a thin,
metallic jaw and a straight mouth which sets slightly downward at the
corners.

He is fond of good food and eats plenty of it.  But he retains his
youthful figure and, unlike many a veteran of World War I, can still
wear his old uniform with comfort.  Like many a farmer's boy, he
retains his childhood habit of early rising and he springs out of bed
by six o'clock each morning.  Then he takes a walk in the open air.

Truman was brought up as a Baptist.  He used to be a regular
attendant at the village Sunday School.  At the age of seven he met a
little girl of six there.  She was called Bess.  Bess is now the Lady
of the White House.  "Bess is the only girl with whom I ever kept
company," says the new President.  "We went to Sunday School
together."

He is a great home-lover.  He is most at ease sitting shirt-sleeved
in a dilapidated rocking chair in the doorway of his old-fashioned
Middle-Western house, with its gingerbread gables, yarning away with
his friends.  The last years in Washington he has lived in a
five-roomed apartment with his wife and daughter, and helped them
with the housework and cooking.

He is very much of a family man.  He says of his wife, "She is my
chief adviser.  I never write a speech without going over it with
her.  She takes care of my personal mail."  His old mother still
keeps a strict eye upon him.  When he burst in upon her with the news
that he had been elected Vice-President of the United States the old
lady then aged ninety-one remarked, "Now, Harry, don't get beyond
yourself."

The new President is a nervous public speaker.  He copies out every
word of every speech and holds it ready to read.  His hands shake and
his knees knock together.  But once on his feet he often becomes
gripped by the force of his own convictions.  His eyes sparkle, he
stands with his shoulders square and his chin out, he bangs out a
challenge to the evil which seeks to dominate the world, with the
fervour and confidence of an Old Testament prophet.

Like many a statesman who has grown rather than swelled with success
and has walked with kings and kept the common touch, President Truman
has a great love of the ordinary fellow and also a faith in his
destiny.  Not long ago, talking of the post-war world, he said, "The
time is ripe for an appeal not to self-interest but to the hunger for
great living that lies deep in every man.  What Americans really want
is not a promise of getting something for nothing, but a chance to
give everything for something great.  We want something we can fight
for with equal intensity in war or peace--something not confined to
combat areas or election campaigns.  We want to feel that what we are
doing for the war effort is at the same time laying foundations for
the future.  After our experience in the last war we are wary of any
programme for 'making the world safe for democracy' which does not
also involve making democracy safe for the world."

Who can say what part this statesman of the soil is called upon to
play in the building of a new world?  Some say he will be outweighted
in his dealings with men of the international stature of Churchill
and Stalin.  I am not so sure.  I predict Truman will be a statesman
formidable beyond expectation.  For he has an immense source of
strength.  He is a man of unyielding principle.  No threat or lure
can induce him to trim.  What he feels right he fights for and ways
of expediency do not commend themselves to his attention.

His recent history offers a first rate example of his constancy and
courage.  During his investigations into the state of American
industry he came in contact with the workers for Moral Re-Armament.
He came to the conclusion that "there is not a single industrial
bottleneck which could not be broken in a matter of weeks if this
crowd were given the green light to go full steam ahead."

Some of these workers were Britons, and it is worth recording that
Truman's deep and outspoken friendship towards Britain was developed
by his contact with these men and the impression he formed of their
unpaid work for his nation.  Certain sections of the American press
began a smear campaign against Moral Re-Armament, and every
inducement was made to Truman to withdraw the endorsement he had
given to that work.  Instead he called the American pressmen together
and issued a statement, part of which said, "I have given much time
and thought to this matter and have come to the clear conviction that
the problems to which the Moral Re-Armament programme is finding an
effective solution are the most urgent in our whole production
picture."

After Truman had been nominated candidate for the Vice-Presidency by
the Democratic party, on the eve of the Presidential election, an
American newspaper which for years has attacked Moral Re-Armament,
published the statement in contemptuous terms that Truman had
disclaimed his interest in Moral Re-Armament and Dr. Buchman.

The easy course would have been to stay silent.  Instead, Truman at
once gave an interview to the _St. Louis Post-Dispatch_, the leading
newspaper of his home State, in which he reaffirmed his belief in the
work done by Moral Re-Armament and described how he first came in
contact with the movement.

At the same interview he mentioned the community of interest between
all religious and moral codes and said, "The preachments of the
Sermon on the Mount and the Ten Commandments represent the full
substance of my own religious beliefs."

When time has stilled the edge of agony which war brings to humanity,
when the clear light of history illuminates the scene war obscured by
smoke and fire and passion, it will be admitted by all men that
President Roosevelt aroused America from her pipe dream.  He showed
the ordinary people of the United States the dangers which threatened
them if Britain lost the war of arms.

Now it is President Truman's task to awaken America and the ordinary
people of the free world to the danger in the war of ideas.  He has
the harder task of showing the victorious nations that they may
themselves, after victory, be saddled with totalitarian systems they
went to war to beat.  He has not only to help build the new machinery
of national and international harmony, but also to get public opinion
to the place where it sees that without a new spirit in the engine
there will be further breakdowns.

He has to educate the great powers, and not least America herself, to
the conception that it is their duty to serve mankind rather than to
dominate.

In an age where cynicism or mere lip-service Christianity have become
fashionable, the new American President retains the fighting faith
which affects every decision of his life.  He believes that God
speaks to those men ready to listen to Him.  In this he is again at
one with Abraham Lincoln, who observed, "I have so many evidences of
God's direction that I cannot doubt this power comes from above.  I
am satisfied that when the Almighty wants me to do or not to do any
particular thing, He finds a way of letting me know it."

The President brings two great assets to his task--a humble
appreciation of the limitations of all human leadership and a
knowledge of the power from above.  So far no man in such a position
who stands firm in this spirit has failed to leave an eternal mark on
civilisation.




By the same Author

IDEAS HAVE LEGS

(Frederick Muller 7s. 6d.)

_75th Thousand_

"Few men know more of the inside story of politics and politicians
than Peter Howard.  _Ideas Have Legs_ deserves to be put into the
hands of every alert trade unionist, co-operator and socialist."

  GEORGE LIGHT, _Chairman_
    _National Trade Union Club_


"Peter Howard has the essence of the matter.  Materialism is the
specific disease of modern industrial civilisation.  The cure is
Christianity."

QUINTIN HOGG, M.P.


"_Ideas Have Legs_ was not intended as a soporific.  Its philosophy
is a challenge to exponents of the Right and Left in the post-war
world.  It is at once direct and dynamic."

DAPHNE Du MAURIER


  Obtainable from
  4, HAY'S MEWS, LONDON, W.1
  and from all booksellers


[The end of _Men on Trial_ by Peter Howard]
