=* A Distributed Proofreaders Canada eBook *=

This eBook is made available at no cost and with very few restrictions.
These restrictions apply only if (1) you make a change in the eBook
(other than alteration for different display devices), or (2) you are
making commercial use of the eBook. If either of these conditions
applies, please contact a https://www.fadedpage.com administrator before
proceeding. Thousands more FREE eBooks are available at
https://www.fadedpage.com.

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be under copyright
in some countries. If you live outside Canada, check your country's
copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER COPYRIGHT IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT
DOWNLOAD OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE.

_Title:_ The Sea Around Us
_Date of first publication:_ 1950
_Author:_ Rachel Carson (1907-1964)
_Date first posted:_ May 26, 2019
_Date last updated:_ May 26, 2019
Faded Page eBook #20190551

This eBook was produced by: Al Haines, Cindy Beyer & the online
Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at https://www.pgdpcanada.net





                        [Dustcover Illustration]
                          [Cover Illustration]




                                                        REVISED EDITION

                                                         [Illustration]

                                   _New York   Oxford University Press_

                                                                   1961




                                                                    THE
                                                                    SEA
                                                                 AROUND
                                                                     US

                                                     RACHEL L. CARSON




    Copyright © 1961 by Rachel L. Carson The Sea Around Us, first
    edition, Copyright 1950, 1951 by Rachel L. Carson

    Library of Congress Catalogue Number: 61-6295

    The editors of the following magazines have kindly given
    permission to reproduce material which originally appeared in
    the pages of their periodicals: _Atlantic Naturalist_, _Nature
    Magazine_, _The New Yorker_, _Science Digest_, and _The Yale
    Review_.

    PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




                                                To HENRY BRYANT BIGELOW

                              WHO BY PRECEPT AND EXAMPLE HAS GUIDED ALL
                                   OTHERS IN THE EXPLORATION OF THE SEA




                                          PREFACE TO THE REVISED EDITION

The sea has always challenged the minds and imagination of men and even
today it remains the last great frontier of Earth. It is a realm so vast
and so difficult of access that with all our efforts we have explored
only a small fraction of its area. Not even the mighty technological
developments of this, the Atomic Age, have greatly changed this
situation. The awakening of active interest in the exploration of the
sea came during the Second World War, when it became clear that our
knowledge of the ocean was dangerously inadequate. We had only the most
rudimentary notions of the geography of that undersea world over which
our ships sailed and through which submarines moved. We knew even less
about the dynamics of the sea in motion, although the ability to predict
the actions of tides and currents and waves might easily determine the
success or failure of military undertakings. The practical need having
been so clearly established, the governments of the United States and of
other leading sea powers began to devote increasing effort to the
scientific study of the sea. Instruments and equipment, most of which
had been born of urgent necessity, gave oceanographers the means of
tracing the contours of the ocean bottom, of studying the movements of
deep waters, and even of sampling the sea floor itself.

These vastly accelerated studies soon began to show that many of the old
conceptions of the sea were faulty, and by the mid-point of the century
a new picture had begun to emerge. But it was still like a huge canvas
on which the artist has indicated the general scheme of his grand design
but on which large blank areas await the clarifying touch of his brush.

This was the state of our knowledge of the ocean world when _The Sea
Around Us_ was written in 1951. Since that time the filling in of many
of the blank areas has proceeded and new discoveries have been made. In
this second edition of the book I have described the most important of
the new findings in a series of notes which will be found in the
Appendix. These notes are keyed to appropriate passages in the original
text by reference numbers. For example, after the discussion of the
Arctic ocean ending on page 63, the reader may go on to learn of recent
discoveries in this area by turning to note 10 in the Appendix.

The 1950’s have comprised an exciting decade in the science of the sea.
During this period a manned vehicle has descended to the deepest hole in
the ocean floor. During the ’fifties, also, the crossing of the entire
Arctic basin was accomplished by submarines traveling under the ice.
Many new features of the unseen floor of the sea have been described,
including new mountain ranges that now appear to be linked with others
to form the longest and mightiest mountains of the earth—a continuous
chain encircling the globe. Deep, hidden rivers in the sea, subsurface
currents with the volume of a thousand Mississippis, have been found.
During the International Geophysical Year, 60 ships from 40 nations, as
well as hundreds of stations on islands and seacoasts, co-operated in an
enormously fruitful study of the sea.

Yet the present achievements, exciting though they are, must be
considered only a beginning to what is yet to be achieved by probing the
vast depths of water that cover most of the surface of the earth. In
1959 a group of distinguished scientists comprising the Committee on
Oceanography of the National Academy of Sciences declared that “Man’s
knowledge of the oceans is meager indeed compared with their importance
to him.” The Committee recommended at least a doubling of basic research
on the sea by the United States in the 1960’s; anything less would, in
its opinion, “jeopardize the position of oceanography in the United
States” compared with other nations and “place us at a disadvantage in
the future use of the resources of the sea.”

One of the most fascinating of the projects now planned for the future
is an attempt to explore the interior of the earth by drilling a hole
three or four miles deep in the bottom of the sea. This project, which
is sponsored by the National Academy of Sciences, is designed to
penetrate farther than instruments have ever before reached, to the
boundary between the earth’s crust and its mantle. This boundary is
known to geologists as the Mohorovicic discontinuity (or more familiarly
as the Moho) because it was discovered by a Yugoslavian of that name in
1912. The Moho is the point at which earthquake waves show a marked
change in velocity, indicating a transition from one kind of material to
something quite different. It lies much deeper under the continents than
under the oceans, so, in spite of the obvious difficulties of drilling
in deep water, an ocean site offers most promise. Above the Moho lies
the crust of the earth, composed of relatively light rocks, below it the
mantle, a layer some 1800 miles thick enclosing the hot core of the
earth. The composition of the crust is not fully known and the nature of
the mantle can be deduced only by the most indirect methods. To
penetrate these regions and bring back actual samples would therefore be
an enormous step forward in understanding the nature of our earth, and
would even advance our knowledge of the universe, since the deep
structure of the earth may be assumed to be like that of other planets.

As we learn more about the sea through the combined studies of many
specialists a new concept that is gradually taking form will almost
certainly be strengthened. Even a decade or so ago it was the fashion to
speak of the abyss as a place of eternal calm, its black recesses
undisturbed by any movement of water more active than a slowly creeping
current, a place isolated from the surface and from the very different
world of the shallow sea. This picture is rapidly being replaced by one
that shows the deep sea as a place of movement and change, an idea that
is far more exciting and that possesses deep significance for some of
the most pressing problems of our time.

In the new and more dynamic concept, the floor of the deep sea is shaped
by racing turbidity currents or mud flows that pour down the slopes of
the ocean basins at high speed; it is visited by submarine landslides
and stirred by internal tides. The crests and ridges of some of the
undersea mountains are swept bare of sediments by currents whose action,
in the words of geologist Bruce Heezen, is comparable to “snow
avalanches in the Alps (which) sweep down and smother the relief of the
lower slopes.”

Far from being isolated from the continents and the shallow seas that
surround them, the abyssal plains are now known to receive sediments
from the margins of the continents. The effect of the turbidity
currents, over the vast stretches of geologic time, is to fill the
trenches and the hollows of the abyssal floor with sediment. This
concept helps us understand certain hitherto puzzling occurrences. Why,
for example, have deposits of sand—surely a product of coastal erosion
and the grinding of surf—appeared on the mid-ocean floor? Why have
sediments at the mouths of submarine canyons, where they communicate
with the abyss, been found to contain such reminders of the land as bits
of wood and leaves, and why are there sands containing nuts, twigs, and
the bark of trees even farther out on the plains of the abyss? In the
powerful downrush of sediment-laden currents, triggered by storms or
floods or earthquakes, we now have a mechanism that accounts for these
once mysterious facts.

Although the beginnings of our present concept of a dynamic sea go back
perhaps several decades, it is only the superb instruments of the past
ten years that have allowed us to glimpse the hidden movements of ocean
waters. Now we suspect that all those dark regions between the surface
and the bottom are stirred by currents. Even such mighty surface
currents as the Gulf Stream are not quite what we supposed them to be.
Instead of a broad and steadily flowing river of water, the Gulf Stream
is now found to consist of narrow, racing tongues of warm water that
curl back in swirls and eddies. And below the surface currents are
others unlike them, running at their own speeds, in their own direction,
with their own volume. And below these are still others. Photographs of
the sea bottom taken at great depths formerly supposed to be eternally
still show ripple marks, a sign that moving waters are sorting over
sediments and carrying away the finer particles. Strong currents have
denuded the crest of much of the vast range of undersea mountains known
as the Atlantic Ridge, and every one of the sea mounts that has been
photographed reveals the work of deep currents in ripple marks and scour
marks.

Other photographs give fresh evidence of life at great depths. Tracks
and trails cross the sea floor and the bottom is studded with small
cones built by unknown forms of life or with holes inhabited by small
burrowers. The Danish research vessel _Galathea_ brought up living
animals in dredges operated at great depths, where only recently it was
supposed life would be too scanty to permit such sampling.

These findings of the dynamic nature of the sea are not academic; they
are not merely dramatic details of a story that has interest but no
application. They have a direct and immediate bearing on what has become
a major problem of our time.

Although man’s record as a steward of the natural resources of the earth
has been a discouraging one, there has long been a certain comfort in
the belief that the sea, at least, was inviolate, beyond man’s ability
to change and to despoil. But this belief, unfortunately, has proved to
be naïve. In unlocking the secrets of the atom, modern man has found
himself confronted with a frightening problem—what to do with the most
dangerous materials that have ever existed in all the earth’s history,
the by-products of atomic fission. The stark problem that faces him is
whether he can dispose of these lethal substances without rendering the
earth uninhabitable.

No account of the sea today is complete unless it takes note of this
ominous problem. By its very vastness and its seeming remoteness, the
sea has invited the attention of those who have the problem of disposal,
and with very little discussion and almost no public notice, at least
until the late ’fifties, the sea has been selected as a “natural”
burying place for the contaminated rubbish and other “low-level wastes”
of the Atomic Age. These wastes are placed in barrels lined with
concrete and hauled out to sea, where they are dumped overboard at
previously designated sites. Some have been taken out 100 miles or more;
recently sites only 20 miles offshore have been suggested. In theory the
containers are deposited at depths of about 1000 fathoms, but in
practice they have at times been placed in much shallower waters.
Supposedly the containers have a life of at least 10 years, after which
whatever radioactive materials remain will be released to the sea. But
again this is only in theory, and a representative of the Atomic Energy
Commission, which either dumps the wastes or licenses others to do so,
has publicly conceded that the containers are unlikely to maintain
“their integrity” while sinking to the bottom. Indeed, in tests
conducted in California, some have been found to rupture under pressure
at only a few hundred fathoms.

But it is only a matter of time until the contents of all such
containers already deposited at sea will be free in the ocean waters,
along with those yet to come as the applications of atomic science
expand. To the packaged wastes so deposited there is now added the
contaminated run-off from rivers that are serving as dumping grounds for
atomic wastes, and the fallout from the testing of bombs, the greater
part of which comes to rest on the vast surface of the sea.

The whole practice, despite protestations of safety by the regulatory
agency, rests on the most insecure basis of fact. Oceanographers say
they can make “only vague estimates” of the fate of radioactive elements
introduced into the deep ocean. They declare that years of intensive
study will be needed to provide understanding of what happens when such
wastes are deposited in estuaries and coastal waters. As we have seen,
all recent knowledge points to far greater activity at all levels of the
sea than had ever been guessed at. The deep turbulence, the horizontal
movements of vast rivers of ocean water streaming one above another in
varying directions, the upwelling of water from the depths carrying with
it minerals from the bottom, and the opposite downward sinking of great
masses of surface water, all result in a gigantic mixing process that in
time will bring about universal distribution of the radioactive
contaminants.

And yet the actual transport of radioactive elements by the sea itself
is only part of the problem. The concentration and distribution of
radioisotopes by marine life may possibly have even greater importance
from the standpoint of human hazard. It is known that plants and animals
of the sea pick up and concentrate radiochemicals, but only vague
information now exists as to details of the process. The minute life of
the sea depends for its existence on the minerals in the water. If the
normal supply of these is low, the organisms will utilize instead the
radioisotope of the needed element if it is present, sometimes
concentrating it as much as a million times beyond its abundance in sea
water. What happens then to the careful calculation of a “maximum
permissible level”? For the tiny organisms are eaten by larger ones and
so on up the food chain to man. By such a process tuna over an area of a
million square miles surrounding the Bikini bomb test developed a degree
of radioactivity enormously higher than that of the sea water.

By their movements and migrations, marine creatures further upset the
convenient theory that radioactive wastes remain in the area where they
are deposited. The smaller organisms regularly make extensive vertical
movements upward toward the surface of the sea at night, downward to
great depths by day. And with them goes whatever radioactivity may be
adhering to them or may have become incorporated into their bodies. The
larger fauna, like fishes, seals, and whales, may migrate over enormous
distances, again aiding in spreading and distributing the radioactive
elements deposited at sea.

The problem, then, is far more complex and far more hazardous than has
been admitted. Even in the comparatively short time since disposal
began, research has shown that some of the assumptions on which it was
based were dangerously inaccurate. The truth is that disposal has
proceeded far more rapidly than our knowledge justifies. To dispose
first and investigate later is an invitation to disaster, for once
radioactive elements have been deposited at sea they are irretrievable.
The mistakes that are made now are made for all time.

It is a curious situation that the sea, from which life first arose,
should now be threatened by the activities of one form of that life. But
the sea, though changed in a sinister way, will continue to exist; the
threat is rather to life itself.

                                                          RACHEL CARSON
Silver Spring, Maryland
October 1960




                                                         ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

To cope alone and unaided with a subject so vast, so complex, and so
infinitely mysterious as the sea would be a task not only cheerless but
impossible, and I have not attempted it. Instead, on every hand I have
been given the most friendly and generous help by those whose work is
the foundation and substance of our present knowledge of the sea.
Specialists on many problems of the ocean have read chapters dealing
with their fields of study and have made comments and suggestions based
on their broad understanding. For such constructive help I am indebted
to Henry B. Bigelow, Charles F. Brooks, and Henry C. Stetson of Harvard
University; Martin W. Johnson, Walter H. Munk, and Francis P. Shepard of
the Scripps Institution of Oceanography; Robert Cushman Murphy and
Albert Eide Parr of the American Museum of Natural History; Carl O.
Dunbar of Yale University; H. A. Marmer of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic
Survey; R. C. Hussey of the University of Michigan; George Cohee of the
U.S. Geological Survey; and Hilary B. Moore of the University of Miami.

Many others have cheerfully gone to great trouble to help locate elusive
documents, have sent me unpublished information and comments, and in
many other ways have lightened my task. Among these are H. U. Sverdrup
of the Norsk Polarinstitutt in Oslo; L. H. W. Cooper of the Laboratory
at Plymouth; Thor Heyerdahl of Oslo; J. W. Christensen, Jens Eggvin, and
Gunnar Rollefsen of the Fiskeridirektoratets Havforskingsinstitutt in
Bergen; H. Blegvad, Secretary General of the International Council for
the Exploration of the Sea; Hans Pettersson of the Oceanografiska
Institutet in Göteborg; and, in the United States, John Putnam Marble of
the National Research Council; Richard Fleming of the Hydrographic
Office; Daniel Merriman of the Bingham Oceanographic Laboratory; Edward
H. Smith of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution; W. N. Bradley and
H. S. Ladd of the U.S. Geological Survey; Maurice Ewing of Columbia
University; and F. R. Fosberg of George Washington University.

The front end paper is reproduced from a portion of the map, _Il Mare di
Amazones_, by permission of the New York Public Library. H. A. Marmer
kindly provided a copy of the old Franklin chart of the Gulf Stream,
which is here reproduced as the back end paper. The fathograms on pages
57 and 63 were furnished by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the
U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, respectively. The drawings were prepared
by Katherine L. Howe.

The library resources of many Government and private institutions have
been placed freely at my disposal, and my especial thanks are due Ida K.
Johnson, Reference Librarian of the Interior Department Library, whose
tireless researches and thorough knowledge of the available literature
have been unfailingly helpful.

My absorption in the mystery and meaning of the sea have been stimulated
and the writing of this book aided by the friendship and encouragement
of William Beebe.

The leisure to write the book and the means of carrying on some of the
studies that contributed to it were in large part made possible by the
award of the Eugene F. Saxton Memorial Fellowship.

                                                               R. L. C.
Silver Spring, Maryland
January 1951




                                                                CONTENTS

            _Part_ I.  MOTHER SEA

                 The Gray Beginnings, 3
                 The Pattern of the Surface, 16
                 The Changing Year, 28
                 The Sunless Sea, 37
                 Hidden Lands, 54
                 The Long Snowfall, 71
                 The Birth of an Island, 79
                 The Shape of Ancient Seas, 94

            _Part_ II.  THE RESTLESS SEA

                 Wind and Water, 107
                 Wind, Sun, and the Spinning of the Earth, 127
                 The Moving Tides, 144

            _Part_ III.  MAN AND THE SEA ABOUT HIM

                 The Global Thermostat, 163
                 Wealth from the Salt Seas, 182
                 The Encircling Sea, 195

            _Appendix_, 211

            _Suggestions for further reading_, 223

            _Index_, 227




                                                           ILLUSTRATIONS

      _Following Page 15_

           Chart of the History of the Earth and Its Life


      _Following Page 36_       _Following Page 126_

           Trilobite                 Chalk Cliffs
           Sargassum Fish            Surf
           Noctiluca                 Minot’s Light
           Bottom Organisms          Chimney Stack
           Bathyscaphe               Tidal Waves during Hurricane
           Coring Tube               Coral Coast
           Fathograms                Seismic Sea Waves
           Volcanic Island           Clouds


      _Following Page 143_

           Current Systems of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans




                                        I


                                   MOTHER
                                      SEA






                         _The Gray Beginnings_


                           AND THE EARTH WAS WITHOUT FORM, AND VOID; AND
                                 DARKNESS WAS UPON THE FACE OF THE DEEP.
                                                                —GENESIS

BEGINNINGS are apt to be shadowy, and so it is with the beginnings of
that great mother of life, the sea. Many people have debated how and
when the earth got its ocean, and it is not surprising that their
explanations do not always agree. For the plain and inescapable truth is
that no one was there to see, and in the absence of eyewitness accounts
there is bound to be a certain amount of disagreement. So if I tell here
the story of how the young planet Earth acquired an ocean, it must be a
story pieced together from many sources and containing whole chapters
the details of which we can only imagine. The story is founded on the
testimony of the earth’s most ancient rocks, which were young when the
earth was young; on other evidence written on the face of the earth’s
satellite, the moon; and on hints contained in the history of the sun
and the whole universe of star-filled space. For although no man was
there to witness this cosmic birth, the stars and the moon and the rocks
were there, and, indeed, had much to do with the fact that there is an
ocean.

The events of which I write must have occurred somewhat more than 2
billion years ago. As nearly as science can tell, that is the
approximate age of the earth, and the ocean must be very nearly as old.
It is possible now to discover the age of the rocks that compose the
crust of the earth by measuring the rate of decay of the radioactive
materials they contain. The oldest rocks found anywhere on earth—in
Manitoba—are about 2.3 billion years old. Allowing 100 million years or
so for the cooling of the earth’s materials to form a rocky crust, we
arrive at the supposition that the tempestuous and violent events
connected with our planet’s birth occurred nearly 2½ billion years ago.
But this is only a minimum estimate, for rocks indicating an even
greater age may be found at any time.[1]

The new earth, freshly torn from its parent sun, was a ball of whirling
gases, intensely hot, rushing through the black spaces of the universe
on a path and at a speed controlled by immense forces. Gradually the
ball of flaming gases cooled. The gases began to liquefy, and Earth
became a molten mass. The materials of this mass eventually became
sorted out in a definite pattern: the heaviest in the center, the less
heavy surrounding them, and the least heavy forming the outer rim. This
is the pattern which persists today—a central sphere of molten iron,
very nearly as hot as it was 2 billion years ago, an intermediate sphere
of semiplastic basalt, and a hard outer shell, relatively quite thin and
composed of solid basalt and granite.

The outer shell of the young earth must have been a good many millions
of years changing from the liquid to the solid state, and it is believed
that, before this change was completed, an event of the greatest
importance took place—the formation of the moon. The next time you
stand on a beach at night, watching the moon’s bright path across the
water, and conscious of the moon-drawn tides, remember that the moon
itself may have been born of a great tidal wave of earthly substance,
torn off into space. And remember that if the moon was formed in this
fashion, the event may have had much to do with shaping the ocean basins
and the continents as we know them.

There were tides in the new earth, long before there was an ocean. In
response to the pull of the sun the molten liquids of the earth’s whole
surface rose in tides that rolled unhindered around the globe and only
gradually slackened and diminished as the earthly shell cooled,
congealed, and hardened. Those who believe that the moon is a child of
Earth say that during an early stage of the earth’s development
something happened that caused this rolling, viscid tide to gather speed
and momentum and to rise to unimaginable heights. Apparently the force
that created these greatest tides the earth has ever known was the force
of resonance, for at this time the period of the solar tides had come to
approach, then equal, the period of the free oscillation of the liquid
earth. And so every sun tide was given increased momentum by the push of
the earth’s oscillation, and each of the twice-daily tides was larger
than the one before it. Physicists have calculated that, after 500 years
of such monstrous, steadily increasing tides, those on the side toward
the sun became too high for stability, and a great wave was torn away
and hurled into space. But immediately, of course, the newly created
satellite became subject to physical laws that sent it spinning in an
orbit of its own about the earth. This is what we call the moon.

There are reasons for believing that this event took place after the
earth’s crust had become slightly hardened, instead of during its partly
liquid state. There is to this day a great scar on the surface of the
globe. This scar or depression holds the Pacific Ocean. According to
some geophysicists, the floor of the Pacific is composed of basalt, the
substance of the earth’s middle layer, while all other oceans are
floored with a thin layer of granite, which makes up most of the earth’s
outer layer. We immediately wonder what became of the Pacific’s granite
covering and the most convenient assumption is that it was torn away
when the moon was formed. There is supporting evidence. The mean density
of the moon is much less than that of the earth (3.3 compared with 5.5),
suggesting that the moon took away none of the earth’s heavy iron core,
but that it is composed only of the granite and some of the basalt of
the outer layers.

The birth of the moon probably helped shape other regions of the world
ocean besides the Pacific. When part of the crust was torn away, strains
must have been set up in the remaining granite envelope. Perhaps the
granite mass cracked open on the side opposite the moon scar. Perhaps,
as the earth spun on its axis and rushed on its orbit through space, the
cracks widened and the masses of granite began to drift apart, moving
over a tarry, slowly hardening layer of basalt. Gradually the outer
portions of the basalt layer became solid and the wandering continents
came to rest, frozen into place with oceans between them. In spite of
theories to the contrary, the weight of geologic evidence seems to be
that the locations of the major ocean basins and the major continental
land masses are today much the same as they have been since a very early
period of the earth’s history.

But this is to anticipate the story, for when the moon was born there
was no ocean. The gradually cooling earth was enveloped in heavy layers
of cloud, which contained much of the water of the new planet. For a
long time its surface was so hot that no moisture could fall without
immediately being reconverted to steam. This dense, perpetually renewed
cloud covering must have been thick enough that no rays of sunlight
could penetrate it. And so the rough outlines of the continents and the
empty ocean basins were sculptured out of the surface of the earth in
darkness, in a Stygian world of heated rock and swirling clouds and
gloom.

As soon as the earth’s crust cooled enough, the rains began to fall.
Never have there been such rains since that time. They fell
continuously, day and night, days passing into months, into years, into
centuries. They poured into the waiting ocean basins, or, falling upon
the continental masses, drained away to become sea.

That primeval ocean, growing in bulk as the rains slowly filled its
basins, must have been only faintly salt. But the falling rains were the
symbol of the dissolution of the continents. From the moment the rains
began to fall, the lands began to be worn away and carried to the sea.
It is an endless, inexorable process that has never stopped—the
dissolving of the rocks, the leaching out of their contained minerals,
the carrying of the rock fragments and dissolved minerals to the ocean.
And over the eons of time, the sea has grown ever more bitter with the
salt of the continents.

In what manner the sea produced the mysterious and wonderful stuff
called protoplasm we cannot say. In its warm, dimly lit waters the
unknown conditions of temperature and pressure and saltiness must have
been the critical ones for the creation of life from non-life. At any
rate they produced the result that neither the alchemists with their
crucibles nor modern scientists in their laboratories have been able to
achieve.

Before the first living cell was created, there may have been many
trials and failures. It seems probable that, within the warm saltiness
of the primeval sea, certain organic substances were fashioned from
carbon dioxide, sulphur, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and calcium.
Perhaps these were transition steps from which the complex molecules of
protoplasm arose—molecules that somehow acquired the ability to
reproduce themselves and begin the endless stream of life. But at
present no one is wise enough to be sure.

Those first living things may have been simple microorganisms rather
like some of the bacteria we know today—mysterious borderline forms
that were not quite plants, not quite animals, barely over the
intangible line that separates the non-living from the living. It is
doubtful that this first life possessed the substance chlorophyll, with
which plants in sunlight transform lifeless chemicals into the living
stuff of their tissues. Little sunshine could enter their dim world,
penetrating the cloud banks from which fell the endless rains. Probably
the sea’s first children lived on the organic substances then present in
the ocean waters, or, like the iron and sulphur bacteria that exist
today, lived directly on inorganic food.

All the while the cloud cover was thinning, the darkness of the nights
alternated with palely illumined days, and finally the sun for the first
time shone through upon the sea. By this time some of the living things
that floated in the sea must have developed the magic of chlorophyll.
Now they were able to take the carbon dioxide of the air and the water
of the sea and of these elements, in sunlight, build the organic
substances they needed. So the first true plants came into being.

Another group of organisms, lacking the chlorophyll but needing organic
food, found they could make a way of life for themselves by devouring
the plants. So the first animals arose, and from that day to this, every
animal in the world has followed the habit it learned in the ancient
seas and depends, directly or through complex food chains, on the plants
for food and life.

As the years passed, and the centuries, and the millions of years, the
stream of life grew more and more complex. From simple, one-celled
creatures, others that were aggregations of specialized cells arose, and
then creatures with organs for feeding, digesting, breathing,
reproducing. Sponges grew on the rocky bottom of the sea’s edge and
coral animals built their habitations in warm, clear waters. Jellyfish
swam and drifted in the sea. Worms evolved, and starfish, and
hard-shelled creatures with many-jointed legs, the arthropods. The
plants, too, progressed, from the microscopic algae to branched and
curiously fruiting seaweeds that swayed with the tides and were plucked
from the coastal rocks by the surf and cast adrift.

During all this time the continents had no life. There was little to
induce living things to come ashore, forsaking their all-providing,
all-embracing mother sea. The lands must have been bleak and hostile
beyond the power of words to describe. Imagine a whole continent of
naked rock, across which no covering mantle of green had been drawn—a
continent without soil, for there were no land plants to aid in its
formation and bind it to the rocks with their roots. Imagine a land of
stone, a silent land, except for the sound of the rains and winds that
swept across it. For there was no living voice, and no living thing
moved over the surface of the rocks.

Meanwhile, the gradual cooling of the planet, which had first given the
earth its hard granite crust, was progressing into its deeper layers;
and as the interior slowly cooled and contracted, it drew away from the
outer shell. This shell, accommodating itself to the shrinking sphere
within it, fell into folds and wrinkles—the earth’s first mountain
ranges.

Geologists tell us that there must have been at least two periods of
mountain building (often called “revolutions”) in that dim period, so
long ago that the rocks have no record of it, so long ago that the
mountains themselves have long since been worn away. Then there came a
third great period of upheaval and readjustment of the earth’s crust,
about a billion years ago, but of all its majestic mountains the only
reminders today are the Laurentian hills of eastern Canada, and a great
shield of granite over the flat country around Hudson Bay.

The epochs of mountain building only served to speed up the processes of
erosion by which the continents were worn down and their crumbling rock
and contained minerals returned to the sea. The uplifted masses of the
mountains were prey to the bitter cold of the upper atmosphere and under
the attacks of frost and snow and ice the rocks cracked and crumbled
away. The rains beat with greater violence upon the slopes of the hills
and carried away the substance of the mountains in torrential streams.
There was still no plant covering to modify and resist the power of the
rains.

And in the sea, life continued to evolve. The earliest forms have left
no fossils by which we can identify them. Probably they were
soft-bodied, with no hard parts that could be preserved. Then, too, the
rock layers formed in those early days have since been so altered by
enormous heat and pressure, under the foldings of the earth’s crust,
that any fossils they might have contained would have been destroyed.

For the past 500 million years, however, the rocks have preserved the
fossil record. By the dawn of the Cambrian period, when the history of
living things was first inscribed on rock pages, life in the sea had
progressed so far that all the main groups of backboneless or
invertebrate animals had been developed. But there were no animals with
backbones, no insects or spiders, and still no plant or animal had been
evolved that was capable of venturing onto the forbidding land. So for
more than three-fourths of geologic time the continents were desolate
and uninhabited, while the sea prepared the life that was later to
invade them and make them habitable. Meanwhile, with violent tremblings
of the earth and with the fire and smoke of roaring volcanoes, mountains
rose and wore away, glaciers moved to and fro over the earth, and the
sea crept over the continents and again receded.

It was not until Silurian time, some 350 million years ago, that the
first pioneer of land life crept out on the shore. It was an arthropod,
one of the great tribe that later produced crabs and lobsters and
insects. It must have been something like a modern scorpion, but, unlike
some of its descendants, it never wholly severed the ties that united it
to the sea. It lived a strange life, half-terrestrial, half-aquatic,
something like that of the ghost crabs that speed along the beaches
today, now and then dashing into the surf to moisten their gills.

Fish, tapered of body and stream-molded by the press of running waters,
were evolving in Silurian rivers. In times of drought, in the drying
pools and lagoons, the shortage of oxygen forced them to develop swim
bladders for the storage of air. One form that possessed an
air-breathing lung was able to survive the dry periods by burying itself
in mud, leaving a passage to the surface through which it breathed.

It is very doubtful that the animals alone would have succeeded in
colonizing the land, for only the plants had the power to bring about
the first amelioration of its harsh conditions. They helped make soil of
the crumbling rocks, they held back the soil from the rains that would
have swept it away, and little by little they softened and subdued the
bare rock, the lifeless desert. We know very little about the first land
plants, but they must have been closely related to some of the larger
seaweeds that had learned to live in the coastal shallows, developing
strengthened stems and grasping, rootlike holdfasts to resist the drag
and pull of the waves. Perhaps it was in some coastal lowlands,
periodically drained and flooded, that some such plants found it
possible to survive, though separated from the sea. This also seem to
have taken place in the Silurian period.

The mountains that had been thrown up by the Laurentian revolution
gradually wore away, and as the sediments were washed from their summits
and deposited on the lowlands, great areas of the continents sank under
the load. The seas crept out of their basins and spread over the lands.
Life fared well and was exceedingly abundant in those shallow, sunlit
seas. But with the later retreat of the ocean water into the deeper
basins, many creatures must have been left stranded in shallow,
landlocked bays. Some of these animals found means to survive on land.
The lakes, the shores of the rivers, and the coastal swamps of those
days were the testing grounds in which plants and animals either became
adapted to the new conditions or perished.

As the lands rose and the seas receded, a strange fishlike creature
emerged on the land, and over the thousands of years its fins became
legs, and instead of gills it developed lungs. In the Devonian sandstone
this first amphibian left its footprint.

On land and sea the stream of life poured on. New forms evolved; some
old ones declined and disappeared. On land the mosses and the ferns and
the seed plants developed. The reptiles for a time dominated the earth,
gigantic, grotesque, and terrifying. Birds learned to live and move in
the ocean of air. The first small mammals lurked inconspicuously in
hidden crannies of the earth as though in fear of the reptiles.

When they went ashore the animals that took up a land life carried with
them a part of the sea in their bodies, a heritage which they passed on
to their children and which even today links each land animal with its
origin in the ancient sea. Fish, amphibian, and reptile, warm-blooded
bird and mammal—each of us carries in our veins a salty stream in which
the elements sodium, potassium, and calcium are combined in almost the
same proportions as in sea water. This is our inheritance from the day,
untold millions of years ago, when a remote ancestor, having progressed
from the one-celled to the many-celled stage, first developed a
circulatory system in which the fluid was merely the water of the sea.
In the same way, our lime-hardened skeletons are a heritage from the
calcium-rich ocean of Cambrian time. Even the protoplasm that streams
within each cell of our bodies has the chemical structure impressed upon
all living matter when the first simple creatures were brought forth in
the ancient sea. And as life itself began in the sea, so each of us
begins his individual life in a miniature ocean within his mother’s
womb, and in the stages of his embryonic development repeats the steps
by which his race evolved, from gill-breathing inhabitants of a water
world to creatures able to live on land.

Some of the land animals later returned to the ocean. After perhaps 50
million years of land life, a number of reptiles entered the sea about
170 million years ago, in the Triassic period. They were huge and
formidable creatures. Some had oarlike limbs by which they rowed through
the water; some were web-footed, with long, serpentine necks. These
grotesque monsters disappeared millions of years ago, but we remember
them when we come upon a large sea turtle swimming many miles at sea,
its barnacle-encrusted shell eloquent of its marine life. Much later,
perhaps no more than 50 million years ago, some of the mammals, too,
abandoned a land life for the ocean. Their descendants are the sea
lions, seals, sea elephants, and whales of today.

Among the land mammals there was a race of creatures that took to an
arboreal existence. Their hands underwent remarkable development,
becoming skilled in manipulating and examining objects, and along with
this skill came a superior brain power that compensated for what these
comparatively small mammals lacked in strength. At last, perhaps
somewhere in the vast interior of Asia, they descended from the trees
and became again terrestrial. The past million years have seen their
transformation into beings with the body and brain and spirit of man.

Eventually man, too, found his way back to the sea. Standing on its
shores, he must have looked out upon it with wonder and curiosity,
compounded with an unconscious recognition of his lineage. He could not
physically re-enter the ocean as the seals and whales had done. But over
the centuries, with all the skill and ingenuity and reasoning powers of
his mind, he has sought to explore and investigate even its most remote
parts, so that he might re-enter it mentally and imaginatively.

He built boats to venture out on its surface. Later he found ways to
descend to the shallow parts of its floor, carrying with him the air
that, as a land mammal long unaccustomed to aquatic life, he needed to
breathe. Moving in fascination over the deep sea he could not enter, he
found ways to probe its depths, he let down nets to capture its life, he
invented mechanical eyes and ears that could re-create for his senses a
world long lost, but a world that, in the deepest part of his
subconscious mind, he had never wholly forgotten.

And yet he has returned to his mother sea only on her own terms. He
cannot control or change the ocean as, in his brief tenancy of earth, he
has subdued and plundered the continents. In the artificial world of his
cities and towns, he often forgets the true nature of his planet and the
long vistas of its history, in which the existence of the race of men
has occupied a mere moment of time. The sense of all these things comes
to him most clearly in the course of a long ocean voyage, when he
watches day after day the receding rim of the horizon, ridged and
furrowed by waves; when at night he becomes aware of the earth’s
rotation as the stars pass overhead; or when, alone in this world of
water and sky, he feels the loneliness of his earth in space. And then,
as never on land, he knows the truth that his world is a water world, a
planet dominated by its covering mantle of ocean, in which the
continents are but transient intrusions of land above the surface of the
all-encircling sea.




[Illustration: Chart of the History of the Earth and Its Life]




                      _The Pattern of the Surface_


                        THERE IS, ONE KNOWS NOT WHAT SWEET MYSTERY ABOUT
                             THIS SEA, WHOSE GENTLY AWFUL STIRRINGS SEEM
                                   TO SPEAK OF SOME HIDDEN SOUL BENEATH.
                                                        —HERMAN MELVILLE

NOWHERE in all the sea does life exist in such bewildering abundance as
in the surface waters. From the deck of a vessel you may look down, hour
after hour, on the shimmering discs of jellyfish, their gently pulsating
bells dotting the surface as far as you can see. Or one day you may
notice early in the morning that you are passing through a sea that has
taken on a brick-red color from billions upon billions of microscopic
creatures, each of which contains an orange pigment granule. At noon you
are still moving through red seas, and when darkness falls the waters
shine with an eerie glow from the phosphorescent fires of yet more
billions and trillions of these same creatures.

And again you may glimpse not only the abundance but something of the
fierce uncompromisingness of sea life when, as you look over the rail
and down, down into water of a clear, deep green, suddenly there passes
a silver shower of finger-long fishlets. The sun strikes a metallic
gleam from their flanks as they streak by, driving deeper into the green
depths with the desperate speed of the hunted. Perhaps you never see the
hunters, but you sense their presence as you see the gulls hovering,
with eager, mewing cries, waiting for the little fish to be driven to
the surface.

Or again, perhaps, you may sail for days on end without seeing anything
you could recognize as life or the indications of life, day after day of
empty water and empty sky, and so you may reasonably conclude that there
is no spot on earth so barren of life as the open ocean. But if you had
the opportunity to tow a fine-meshed net through the seemingly lifeless
water and then to examine the washings of the net, you would find that
life is scattered almost everywhere through the surface waters like a
fine dust. A cupful of water may contain millions upon millions of
diatoms, tiny plant cells, each of them far too small to be seen by the
human eye; or it may swarm with an infinitude of animal creatures, none
larger than a dust mote, which live on plant cells still smaller than
themselves.

If you could be close to the surface waters of the ocean at night, you
would realize that then they are alive with myriads of strange creatures
never seen by day. They are alive with the moving lamps of small
shrimplike beings that spend the daylight hours in the gloom of deep
water, and with the shadowy forms of hungry fish and the dark shapes of
squid. These things were seen, as few men have seen them, by the
Norwegian ethnologist Thor Heyerdahl in the course of one of the most
unusual journeys of modern times. In the summer of 1947 Heyerdahl and
five companions drifted 4300 miles across the Pacific on a raft of balsa
logs, to test a theory that the original inhabitants of Polynesia might
have come from South America by raft. For 101 days and nights these men
lived practically on the surface of the sea, driven by the trade wind,
carried on the strong drift of the Equatorial Current, as much a part of
the inexorable westward movement of wind and water as the creatures of
the sea. Because of his enviable opportunity to observe the life of the
surface while living as an actual part of it for so many weeks, I asked
Mr. Heyerdahl about some of his impressions, especially of the sea at
night, and he has written me as follows:

    Chiefly at night, but occasionally in broad daylight, a shoal of
    small squids shot out of the water precisely like flying fish,
    gliding through the air as much as up to six feet above the
    surface, until they lost the speed accumulated below water, and
    fell down helplessly. In their gliding flight with flaps out
    they were so much like small flying fish at a distance, that we
    had no idea we saw anything unusual until a live squid flew
    right into one of the crew and fell down on deck. Almost every
    night we found one or two on the deck or on the roof of the
    bamboo hut.

    It was my own definite impression that the marine life in
    general went deeper down in the daytime than during the nights,
    and that the darker the night was, the more life we had around
    us. At two different occasions, a snake-mackerel, Gempylus,
    never before seen by man except as skeletal remains washed
    ashore on South America and the Galapagos, came jumping clear
    out of the water and right up on the raft (once right into the
    hut). To judge from the huge eyes and the fact that the fish has
    never before been observed, I am inclined to suspect that it is
    a deep-sea fish that comes to the surface only at night.

    On dark nights we could see much marine life which we were
    unable to identify. They seemed to be deep-sea fishes
    approaching the surface at night. Generally we saw it as vaguely
    phosphorescent bodies, often the size and shape of a dinner
    plate, but at least one night in the shape of three immense
    bodies of irregular and changing shape and dimensions which
    appeared to exceed those of the raft (KON-TIKI measured about 45
    by 18 feet). Apart from these greater bodies, we observed
    occasionally great quantities of phosphorescent plankton, often
    containing illuminating copepods up to the size of a millimeter
    or more.

With these surface waters, through a series of delicately adjusted,
interlocking relationships, the life of all parts of the sea is linked.
What happens to a diatom in the upper, sunlit strata of the sea may well
determine what happens to a cod lying on a ledge of some rocky canyon a
hundred fathoms below, or to a bed of multicolored, gorgeously plumed
seaworms carpeting an underlying shoal, or to a prawn creeping over the
soft oozes of the sea floor in the blackness of mile-deep water.

The activities of the microscopic vegetables of the sea, of which the
diatoms are most important, make the mineral wealth of the water
available to the animals. Feeding directly on the diatoms and other
groups of minute unicellular algae are the marine protozoa, many
crustaceans, the young of crabs, barnacles, seaworms, and fishes. Hordes
of the small carnivores, the first link in the chain of flesh eaters,
move among these peaceful grazers. There are fierce little dragons half
an inch long, the sharp-jawed arrowworms. There are gooseberrylike comb
jellies, armed with grasping tentacles, and there are the shrimplike
euphausiids that strain food from the water with their bristly
appendages. Since they drift where the currents carry them, with no
power or will to oppose that of the sea, this strange community of
creatures and the marine plants that sustain them are called ‘plankton,’
a word derived from the Greek, meaning ‘wandering.’

From the plankton the food chains lead on, to the schools of
plankton-feeding fishes like the herring, menhaden, and mackerel; to the
fish-eating fishes like the bluefish and tuna and sharks; to the pelagic
squids that prey on fishes; to the great whales who, according to their
species but not according to their size, may live on fishes, on shrimps,
or on some of the smallest of the plankton creatures.

Unmarked and trackless though it may seem to us, the surface of the
ocean is divided into definite zones, and the pattern of the surface
water controls the distribution of its life. Fishes and plankton, whales
and squids, birds and sea turtles, all are linked by unbreakable ties to
certain kinds of water—to warm water or cold water, to clear or turbid
water, to water rich in phosphates or in silicates. For the animals
higher in the food chains the ties are less direct; they are bound to
water where their food is plentiful, and the food animals are there
because the water conditions are right.

The change from zone to zone may be abrupt. It may come upon us unseen,
as our ship at night crosses an invisible boundary line. So Charles
Darwin on H.M.S. _Beagle_ one dark night off the coast of South America
crossed from tropical water into that of the cool south. Instantly the
vessel was surrounded by numerous seals and penguins, which made such a
bedlam of strange noises that the officer on watch was deceived into
thinking the ship had, by some miscalculation, run close inshore, and
that the sounds he heard were the bellowing of cattle.

To the human senses, the most obvious patterning of the surface waters
is indicated by color. The deep blue water of the open sea far from land
is the color of emptiness and barrenness; the green water of the coastal
areas, with all its varying hues, is the color of life. The sea is blue
because the sunlight is reflected back to our eyes from the water
molecules or from very minute particles suspended in the sea. In the
journey of the light rays into deep water all the red rays and most of
the yellow rays of the spectrum have been absorbed, so when the light
returns to our eyes it is chiefly the cool blue rays that we see. Where
the water is rich in plankton, it loses the glassy transparency that
permits this deep penetration of the light rays. The yellow and brown
and green hues of the coastal waters are derived from the minute algae
and other microorganisms so abundant there. Seasonal abundance of
certain forms containing reddish or brown pigments may cause the ‘red
water’ known from ancient times in many parts of the world, and so
common in this condition in some enclosed seas that they owe their names
to it—the Red Sea and the Vermilion Sea are examples.

The colors of the sea are only the indirect signs of the presence or
absence of conditions needed to support the surface life; other zones,
invisible to the eye, are the ones that largely determine where marine
creatures may live. For the sea is by no means a uniform solution of
water; parts of it are more salty than others, and parts are warmer or
colder.

The saltiest ocean water in the world is that of the Red Sea, where the
burning sun and the fierce heat of the atmosphere produce such rapid
evaporation that the salt content is 40 parts per thousand. The Sargasso
Sea, an area of high air temperatures, receiving no inflow of river
water or melting ice because of its remoteness from land, is the
saltiest part of the Atlantic, which in turn is the saltiest of the
oceans. The polar seas, as one would expect, are the least salty,
because they are constantly being diluted by rain, snow, and melting
ice. Along the Atlantic coast of the United States, the salinity range
from about 33 parts per thousand off Cape Cod to about 36 off Florida is
a difference easily perceptible to the senses of human bathers.

Ocean temperatures vary from about 28° F. in polar seas to 96° in the
Persian Gulf, which contains the hottest ocean water in the world. To
creatures of the sea, which with few exceptions must match in their own
bodies the temperature of the surrounding water, this range is
tremendous, and change of temperature is probably the most important
single condition that controls the distribution of marine animals.

The beautiful reef corals are a perfect example of the way the
inhabitable areas for any particular class of creatures may be
established by temperatures. If you took a map of the world and drew a
line 30° north of the equator and another 30° south of it, you would
have outlined in general the waters where reef corals are found at the
present time. It is true that the remains of ancient coral reefs have
been discovered in arctic waters, but this means that in some past ages
the climate of these northern seas was tropical. The calcareous
structure of the coral reef can be fashioned only in water at least as
warm as 70° Fahrenheit. We would have to make one northward extension of
our map, where the Gulf Stream carries water warm enough for corals to
Bermuda, at 32° north latitude. On the other hand, within our tropical
belt, we would have to erase large areas on the west coasts of South
America and Africa, where upwelling of cold water from lower ocean
levels prevents the growth of corals. Most of the east coast of Florida
has no coral reefs because of a cool inshore current, running southward
between the coast and the Gulf Stream.

As between tropical and polar regions, the differences in the kinds and
abundance of life are tremendous. The warm temperatures of the tropics
speed up the processes of reproduction and growth, so that many
generations are produced in the time required to bring one to maturity
in cold seas. There is more opportunity for genetic mutations to be
produced within a given time; hence the bewildering variety of tropical
life. Yet in any species there are far fewer individuals than in the
colder zones, where the mineral content of the water is richer, and
there are no dense swarms of surface plankton, like the copepods of the
Arctic. The pelagic, or free-swimming, forms of the tropics live deeper
than those of the colder regions, and so there is less food for large
surface-feeders. In the tropics, therefore, the sea birds do not compare
in abundance with the clouds of shearwaters, fulmars, auks, whalebirds,
albatrosses, and other birds seen over far northern or far southern
fishing grounds.

In the cold-water communities of the polar seas, fewer of the animals
have swimming larvae. Generation after generation settle down near the
parents, so that large areas of bottom may be covered with the
descendants of a very few animals. In the Barents Sea a research vessel
once brought up more than a ton of one of the silicious sponges at a
single haul, and enormous patches of a single species of annelid worm
carpet the east coast of Spitsbergen. Copepods and swimming snails fill
the surface waters of the cold seas, and lure the herring and the
mackerel, the flocks of sea birds, the whales, and the seals.

In the tropics, then, sea life is intense, vivid, and infinitely varied.
In cold seas it proceeds at a pace slowed by the icy water in which it
exists, but the mineral richness of these waters (largely a result of
seasonal overturn and consequent mixing) makes possible the enormous
abundance of the forms that inhabit them. For a good many years it has
been said categorically that the total productivity of the colder
temperate and polar seas is far greater than the tropical. Now it is
becoming plain that there are important exceptions to this statement. In
certain tropical and subtropical waters, there are areas where the sheer
abundance of life rivals the Grand Banks or the Barents Sea or any
antarctic whaling ground. Perhaps the best examples are the Humboldt
Current, off the west coast of South America, and the Benguela Current,
off the west coast of Africa. In both currents, upwelling of cold,
mineral-laden water from deeper layers of the sea provides the
fertilizing elements to sustain the great food chains.

And wherever two currents meet, especially if they differ sharply in
temperature or salinity, there are zones of great turbulence and unrest,
with water sinking or rising up from the depths and with shifting eddies
and foam lines at the surface. At such places the richness and abundance
of marine life reveals itself most strikingly. This changing life, seen
as his ship cut across the pathways of the great currents of the Pacific
and the Atlantic, was described with vivid detail by S. C. Brooks:

    Within a few degrees of the equator, the scattered cumulus
    clouds become thicker and grayer, a confused swell makes up,
    rain squalls come and go, and birds appear. At first there is
    only a greater abundance of storm petrels, with here and there
    petrels of other kinds hunting along utterly indifferent to the
    ship, or small groups of tropic birds flying along with the
    ship, off to one side or high overhead. Then scattered groups of
    various petrels appear, and finally for an hour or two there are
    birds on every hand. If one is not too far from land, a few
    hundred miles perhaps, as in the case of the south equatorial
    drift north of the Marquesas, one may also see multitudes of
    sooty or crested terns. Occasionally one sees the grayish blue
    form of a shark gliding along, or a big purplish-brown
    hammerhead lazily twisting around as though trying to get a
    better view of the ship. Flying fish, while not so closely
    localized as the birds, are breaking the water every few
    seconds, and bewitch the beholder by their myriad sizes, shapes,
    and antics, and their bewildering patterns and shades of deep
    brown, opal blue, yellow and purple. Then the sun comes out
    again, the sea takes on its deep tropical blue, the birds become
    more and more scarce, and gradually, as the ship moves on, the
    ocean resumes its desert aspect.

    If it were daylight all the time, this same sequence might be
    seen in a more or less striking fashion twice or perhaps even
    three or four times. Inquiry soon reveals that this sequence
    marks the time of passing the edge of one of the great currents
    . . .

    In the North Atlantic ship lanes the same play is staged with
    different actors. Instead of the equatorial currents there are
    the Gulf Stream and its continuation, the North Atlantic Drift,
    and the Arctic Current; instead of confused swell and squalls of
    rain there are slicks and fogs. Tropic-birds are replaced by
    jaegers and skuas; and different species of the petrel group,
    usually here spoken of as shearwaters and fulmars, are flying or
    swimming about, often in great flocks . . . Here, too, perhaps,
    one sees less of sharks and more of porpoise racing with the
    cut-water or doggedly hurrying, school after school, toward some
    unguessable objective. The flashing black and white of the young
    orcas, or the distant sudden spurt and lazy drift of a whale’s
    spouting, lend life to the water, as do the antics of flying
    fish, distant though they be from their traditional home in the
    tropics . . . One may pass from the blue water of the Stream,
    with floating gulf weed (Sargassum), and perhaps here and there
    the iridescent float of a Portuguese man-of-war, into the
    gray-green water of the Arctic Current with its thousands of
    jellyfish, and in a few hours back again into the Stream. Each
    time, at the margin, one is likely to see the surface display of
    that abundance of life which has made the Grand Banks one of the
    great fisheries of the world.[A]

[A] From _The Condor_, vol. 36, no. 5, Sept.-Oct. 1934, pp. 186-7.

-----

The mid-ocean regions, bounded by the currents that sweep around the
ocean basins, are in general the deserts of the sea. There are few birds
and few surface-feeding fishes, and indeed there is little surface
plankton to attract them. The life of these regions is largely confined
to deep water. The Sargasso Sea is an exception, not matched in the
anticyclonic centers of other ocean basins. It is so different from any
other place on earth that it may well be considered a definite
geographic region. A line drawn from the mouth of Chesapeake Bay to
Gibraltar would skirt its northern border; another from Haiti to Dakar
would mark its southern boundary. It lies all about Bermuda and extends
more than halfway across the Atlantic, its entire area being roughly as
large as the United States. The Sargasso, with all its legendary terrors
for sailing ships, is a creation of the great currents of the North
Atlantic that encircle it and bring into it the millions of tons of
floating sargassum weed from which the place derives its name, and all
the weird assemblage of animals that live in the weed.

The Sargasso is a place forgotten by the winds, undisturbed by the
strong flow of waters that girdle it as with a river. Under the
seldom-clouded skies, its waters are warm and heavy with salt. Separated
widely from coastal rivers and from polar ice, there is no inflow of
fresh water to dilute its saltiness; the only influx is of saline water
from the adjacent currents, especially from the Gulf Stream or North
Atlantic Current as it crosses from America to Europe. And with the
little, inflowing streams of surface water come the plants and animals
that for months or years have drifted in the Gulf Stream.

The sargassum weeds are brown algae belonging to several species.
Quantities of the weeds live attached to reefs or rocky outcroppings off
the coasts of the West Indies and Florida. Many of the plants are torn
away by storms, especially during the hurricane season. They are picked
up by the Gulf Stream and are drifted northward. With the weeds go, as
involuntary passengers, many small fishes, crabs, shrimps, and
innumerable larvae of assorted species of marine creatures, whose home
had been the coastal banks of sargassum weed.

Curious things happen to the animals that have ridden on the sargassum
weed into a new home. Once they lived near the sea’s edge, a few feet or
a few fathoms below the surface, but never far above a firm bottom. They
knew the rhythmic movements of waves and tides. They could leave the
shelter of the weeds at will and creep or swim about over the bottom in
search of food. Now, in the middle of the ocean, they are in a new
world. The bottom lies two or three miles below them. Those who are poor
swimmers must cling to the weed, which now represents a life raft,
supporting them above the abyss. Over the ages since their ancestors
came here, some species have developed special organs of attachment,
either for themselves or for their eggs, so that they may not sink into
the cold, dark water far below. The flying fish make nests of the weed
to contain their eggs, which bear an amazing resemblance to the
sargassum floats or ‘berries.’

Indeed, many of the little marine beasts of the weedy jungle seem to be
playing an elaborate game of disguise in which each is camouflaged to
hide it from the others. The Sargasso sea slug—a snail without a
shell—has a soft, shapeless brown body spotted with dark-edged circles
and fringed with flaps and folds of skin, so that as it creeps over the
weed in search of prey it can scarcely be distinguished from the
vegetation. One of the fiercest carnivores of the place, the sargassum
fish Pterophryne, has copied with utmost fidelity the branching fronds
of the weed, its golden berries, its rich brown color, and even the
white dots of encrusting worm tubes. All these elaborate bits of mimicry
are indications of the fierce internecine wars of the Sargasso jungles,
which go on without quarter and without mercy for the weak or the
unwary.

In the science of the sea there has been a long-standing controversy
about the origin of the drifting weeds of the Sargasso Sea. Some have
held that the supply is maintained by weeds recently torn away from
coastal beds; others say that the rather limited sargassum fields of the
West Indies and Florida cannot possibly supply the immense area of the
Sargasso. They believe that we find here a self-perpetuating community
of plants that have become adapted to life in the open sea, needing no
roots or holdfasts for attachment, and able to propagate vegetatively.
Probably there is truth in both ideas. New plants do come in each year
in small numbers, and now cover an immense area because of their very
long life once they have reached this quiet central region of the
Atlantic.

It takes about half a year for the plants torn from West Indian shores
to reach the northern border of the Sargasso, perhaps several years for
them to be carried into the inner parts of this area. Meanwhile, some
have been swept onto the shores of North America by storms, others have
been killed by cold during the passage from offshore New England across
the Atlantic, where the Gulf Stream comes into contact with waters from
the Arctic. For the plants that reach the calm of the Sargasso, there is
virtual immortality. A. E. Parr of the American Museum has recently
suggested that the individual plants may live, some for decades, other
for centuries, according to their species. It might well be that some of
the very weeds you would see if you visited the place today were seen by
Columbus and his men. Here, in the heart of the Atlantic, the weed
drifts endlessly, growing, reproducing vegetatively by a process of
fragmentation. Apparently almost the only plants that die are the ones
that drift into unfavorable conditions around the edges of the Sargasso
or are picked up by outward-moving currents.

Such losses are balanced, or possibly a little more than balanced, by
the annual addition of weeds from distant coasts. It must have taken
eons of time to accumulate the present enormous quantities of weed,
which Parr estimates as about 10 million tons. But this, of course, is
distributed over so large an area that most of the Sargasso is open
water. The dense fields of weeds waiting to entrap a vessel never
existed except in the imaginations of sailors, and the gloomy hulks of
vessels doomed to endless drifting in the clinging weed are only the
ghosts of things that never were.




                          _The Changing Year_


                                      THUS WITH THE YEAR SEASONS RETURN.
                                                                 —MILTON

FOR the sea as a whole, the alternation of day and night, the passage of
the seasons, the procession of the years, are lost in its vastness,
obliterated in its own changeless eternity. But the surface waters are
different. The face of the sea is always changing. Crossed by colors,
lights, and moving shadows, sparkling in the sun, mysterious in the
twilight, its aspects and its moods vary hour by hour. The surface
waters move with the tides, stir to the breath of the winds, and rise
and fall to the endless, hurrying forms of the waves. Most of all, they
change with the advance of the seasons. Spring moves over the temperate
lands of our Northern Hemisphere in a tide of new life, of pushing green
shoots and unfolding buds, all its mysteries and meanings symbolized in
the northward migration of the birds, the awakening of sluggish
amphibian life as the chorus of frogs rises again from the wet lands,
the different sound of the wind which stirs the young leaves where a
month ago it rattled the bare branches. These things we associate with
the land, and it is easy to suppose that at sea there could be no such
feeling of advancing spring. But the signs are there, and seen with
understanding eye, they bring the same magical sense of awakening.

In the sea, as on land, spring is a time for the renewal of life. During
the long months of winter in the temperate zones the surface waters have
been absorbing the cold. Now the heavy water begins to sink, slipping
down and displacing the warmer layers below. Rich stores of minerals
have been accumulating on the floor of the continental shelf—some
freighted down the rivers from the lands; some derived from sea
creatures that have died and whose remains have drifted down to the
bottom; some from the shells that once encased a diatom, the streaming
protoplasm of a radiolarian, or the transparent tissues of a pteropod.
Nothing is wasted in the sea; every particle of material is used over
and over again, first by one creature, then by another. And when in
spring the waters are deeply stirred, the warm bottom water brings to
the surface a rich supply of minerals, ready for use by new forms of
life.

Just as land plants depend on minerals in the soil for their growth,
every marine plant, even the smallest, is dependent upon the nutrient
salts or minerals in the sea water. Diatoms must have silica, the
element of which their fragile shells are fashioned. For these and all
other microplants, phosphorus is an indispensable mineral. Some of these
elements are in short supply and in winter may be reduced below the
minimum necessary for growth. The diatom population must tide itself
over this season as best it can. It faces a stark problem of survival,
with no opportunity to increase, a problem of keeping alive the spark of
life by forming tough protective spores against the stringency of
winter, a matter of existing in a dormant state in which no demands
shall be made on an environment that already withholds all but the most
meager necessities of life. So the diatoms hold their place in the
winter sea, like seeds of wheat in a field under snow and ice, the seeds
from which the spring growth will come.

These, then, are the elements of the vernal blooming of the sea: the
‘seeds’ of the dormant plants, the fertilizing chemicals, the warmth of
the spring sun.

In a sudden awakening, incredible in its swiftness, the simplest plants
of the sea begin to multiply. Their increase is of astronomical
proportions. The spring sea belongs at first to the diatoms and to all
the other microscopic plant life of the plankton. In the fierce
intensity of their growth they cover vast areas of ocean with a living
blanket of their cells. Mile after mile of water may appear red or brown
or green, the whole surface taking on the color of the infinitesimal
grains of pigment contained in each of the plant cells.

The plants have undisputed sway in the sea for only a short time. Almost
at once their own burst of multiplication is matched by a similar
increase in the small animals of the plankton. It is the spawning time
of the copepod and the glassworm, the pelagic shrimp and the winged
snail. Hungry swarms of these little beasts of the plankton roam through
the waters, feeding on the abundant plants and themselves falling prey
to larger creatures. Now in the spring the surface waters become a vast
nursery. From the hills and valleys of the continent’s edge lying far
below, and from the scattered shoals and banks, the eggs or young of
many of the bottom animals rise to the surface of the sea. Even those
which, in their maturity, will sink down to a sedentary life on the
bottom, spend the first weeks of life as freely swimming hunters of the
plankton. So as spring progresses new batches of larvae rise into the
surface each day, the young of fishes and crabs and mussels and tube
worms, mingling for a time with the regular members of the plankton.

Under the steady and voracious grazing, the grasslands of the surface
are soon depleted. The diatoms become more and more scarce, and with
them the other simple plants. Still there are brief explosions of one or
another form, when in a sudden orgy of cell division it comes to claim
whole areas of the sea for its own. So, for a time each spring, the
waters may become blotched with brown, jellylike masses, and the
fishermen’s nets come up dripping a brown slime and containing no fish,
for the herring have turned away from these waters as though in loathing
of the viscid, foul-smelling algae. But in less time than passes between
the full moon and the new, the spring flowering of Phaeocystis is past
and the waters have cleared again.

In the spring the sea is filled with migrating fishes, some of them
bound for the mouths of great rivers, which they will ascend to deposit
their spawn. Such are the spring-run chinooks coming in from the deep
Pacific feeding grounds to breast the rolling flood of the Columbia, the
shad moving in to the Chesapeake and the Hudson and the Connecticut, the
alewives seeking a hundred coastal streams of New England, the salmon
feeling their way to the Penobscot and the Kennebec. For months or years
these fish have known only the vast spaces of the ocean. Now the spring
sea and the maturing of their own bodies lead them back to the rivers of
their birth.

Other mysterious comings and goings are linked with the advance of the
year. Capelin gather in the deep, cold water of the Barents Sea, their
shoals followed and preyed upon by flocks of auks, fulmars, and
kittiwakes. Cod approach the banks of Lofoten, and gather off the shores
of Iceland. Birds whose winter feeding territory may have encompassed
the whole Atlantic or the whole Pacific converge upon some small island,
the entire breeding population arriving within the space of a few days.
Whales suddenly appear off the slopes of the coastal banks where the
swarms of shrimplike krill are spawning, the whales having come from no
one knows where, by no one knows what route.

With the subsiding of the diatoms and the completed spawning of many of
the plankton animals and most of the fish, life in the surface waters
slackens to the slower pace of midsummer. Along the meeting places of
the currents the pale moon jelly Aurelia gathers in thousands, forming
sinuous lines or windrows across miles of sea, and the birds see their
pale forms shimmering deep down in the green water. By midsummer the
large red jellyfish Cyanea may have grown from the size of a thimble to
that of an umbrella. The great jellyfish moves through the sea with
rhythmic pulsations, trailing long tentacles and as likely as not
shepherding a little group of young cod or haddock, which find shelter
under its bell and travel with it.

A hard, brilliant, coruscating phosphorescence often illuminates the
summer sea. In waters where the protozoa Noctiluca is abundant it is the
chief source of this summer luminescence, causing fishes, squids, or
dolphins to fill the water with racing flames and to clothe themselves
in a ghostly radiance. Or again the summer sea may glitter with a
thousand thousand moving pinpricks of light, like an immense swarm of
fireflies moving through a dark wood. Such an effect is produced by a
shoal of the brilliantly phosphorescent shrimp Meganyctiphanes, a
creature of cold and darkness and of the places where icy water rolls
upward from the depths and bubbles with white ripplings at the surface.

Out over the plankton meadows of the North Atlantic the dry twitter of
the phalaropes, small brown birds, wheeling and turning, dipping and
rising, is heard for the first time since early spring. The phalaropes
have nested on the arctic tundras, reared their young, and now the first
of them are returning to the sea. Most of them will continue south over
the open water far from land, crossing the equator into the South
Atlantic. Here they will follow where the great whales lead, for where
the whales are, there also are the swarms of plankton on which these
strange little birds grow fat.

As the fall advances, there are other movements, some in the surface,
some hidden in the green depths, that betoken the end of summer. In the
fog-covered waters of Bering Sea, down through the treacherous passes
between the islands of the Aleutian chain and southward into the open
Pacific, the herds of fur seals are moving. Left behind are two small
islands, treeless bits of volcanic soil thrust up into the waters of
Bering Sea. The islands are silent now, but for the several months of
summer they resounded with the roar of millions of seals come ashore to
bear and rear their young—all the fur seals of the eastern Pacific
crowded into a few square miles of bare rock and crumbling soil. Now
once more the seals turn south, to roam down along the sheer underwater
cliffs of the continent’s edge, where the rocky foundations fall away
steeply into the deep sea. Here, in a blackness more absolute than that
of arctic winter, the seals will find rich feeding as they swim down to
prey on the fishes of this region of darkness.

Autumn comes to the sea with a fresh blaze of phosphorescence, when
every wave crest is aflame. Here and there the whole surface may glow
with sheets of cold fire, while below schools of fish pour through the
water like molten metal. Often the autumnal phosphorescence is caused by
a fall flowering of the dinoflagellates, multiplying furiously in a
short-lived repetition of their vernal blooming.

Sometimes the meaning of the glowing water is ominous. Off the Pacific
coast of North America, it may mean that the sea is filled with the
dinoflagellate Gonyaulax, a minute plant that contains a poison of
strange and terrible virulence. About four days after Gonyaulax comes to
dominate the coastal plankton, some of the fishes and shellfish in the
vicinity become toxic. This is because, in their normal feeding, they
have strained the poisonous plankton out of the water. Mussels
accumulate the Gonyaulax toxins in their livers, and the toxins react on
the human nervous system with an effect similar to that of strychnine.
Because of these facts, it is generally understood along the Pacific
coast that it is unwise to eat shellfish taken from coasts exposed to
the open sea where Gonyaulax may be abundant, in summer or early fall.
For generations before the white men came, the Indians knew this. As
soon as the red streaks appeared in the sea and the waves began to
flicker at night with the mysterious blue-green fires, the tribal
leaders forbade the taking of mussels until these warning signals should
have passed. They even set guards at intervals along the beaches to warn
inlanders who might come down for shellfish and be unable to read the
language of the sea.

But usually the blaze and glitter of the sea, whatever its meaning for
those who produce it, implies no menace to man. Seen from the deck of a
vessel in open ocean, a tiny, man-made observation point in the vast
world of sea and sky, it has an eerie and unearthly quality. Man, in his
vanity, subconsciously attributes a human origin to any light not of
moon or stars or sun. Lights on the shore, lights moving over the water,
mean lights kindled and controlled by other men, serving purposes
understandable to the human mind. Yet here are lights that flash and
fade away, lights that come and go for reasons meaningless to man,
lights that have been doing this very thing over the eons of time in
which there were no men to stir in vague disquiet.

On such a night of phosphorescent display Charles Darwin stood on the
deck of the _Beagle_ as she plowed southward through the Atlantic off
the coast of Brazil.

    The sea from its extreme luminousness presented a wonderful and
    most beautiful appearance [he wrote in his diary]. Every part of
    the water which by day is seen as foam, glowed with a pale
    light. The vessel drove before her bows two billows of liquid
    phosphorus, and in her wake was a milky train. As far as the eye
    reached the crest of every wave was bright; and from the
    reflected light, the sky just above the horizon was not so
    utterly dark as the rest of the Heavens. It was impossible to
    behold this plain of matter, as it were melted and consuming by
    heat, without being reminded of Milton’s description of the
    regions of Chaos and Anarchy.[B]

[B] From _Charles Darwin’s Diary of the Voyage of H.M.S. Beagle_, edited
by Nora Barlow, 1934 edition, Cambridge University Press, p. 107.

-----

Like the blazing colors of the autumn leaves before they wither and
fall, the autumnal phosphorescence betokens the approach of winter.
After their brief renewal of life the flagellates and the other minute
algae dwindle away to a scattered few; so do the shrimps and the
copepods, the glassworms and the comb jellies. The larvae of the bottom
fauna have long since completed their development and drifted away to
take up whatever existence is their lot. Even the roving fish schools
have deserted the surface waters and have migrated into warmer latitudes
or have found equivalent warmth in the deep, quiet waters along the edge
of the continental shelf. There the torpor of semi-hibernation descends
upon them and will possess them during the months of winter.

The surface waters now become the plaything of the winter gales. As the
winds build up the giant storm waves and roar along their crests,
lashing the water into foam and flying spray, it seems that life must
forever have deserted this place.

For the mood of the winter sea, read Joseph Conrad’s description:

    The greyness of the whole immense surface, the wind furrows upon
    the faces of the waves, the great masses of foam, tossed about
    and waving, like matted white locks, give to the sea in a gale
    an appearance of hoary age, lustreless, dull, without gleams, as
    though it had been created before light itself.[C]

[C] From _The Mirror of the Sea_, Kent edition, 1925, Doubleday-Page, p.
71.

-----

But the symbols of hope are not lacking even in the greyness and
bleakness of the winter sea. On land we know that the apparent
lifelessness of winter is an illusion. Look closely at the bare branches
of a tree, on which not the palest gleam of green can be discerned. Yet,
spaced along each branch are the leaf buds, all the spring’s magic of
swelling green concealed and safely preserved under the insulating,
overlapping layers. Pick off a piece of the rough bark of the trunk;
there you will find hibernating insects. Dig down through the snow into
the earth. There are the eggs of next summer’s grasshoppers; there are
the dormant seeds from which will come the grass, the herb, the oak
tree.

So, too, the lifelessness, the hopelessness, the despair of the winter
sea are an illusion. Everywhere are the assurances that the cycle has
come to the full, containing the means of its own renewal. There is the
promise of a new spring in the very iciness of the winter sea, in the
chilling of the water, which must, before many weeks, become so heavy
that it will plunge downward, precipitating the overturn that is the
first act in the drama of spring. There is the promise of new life in
the small plantlike things that cling to the rocks of the underlying
bottom, the almost formless polyps from which, in spring, a new
generation of jellyfish will bud off and rise into the surface waters.
There is unconscious purpose in the sluggish forms of the copepods
hibernating on the bottom, safe from the surface storms, life sustained
in their tiny bodies by the extra store of fat with which they went into
this winter sleep.

Already, from the gray shapes of cod that have moved, unseen by man,
through the cold sea to their spawning places, the glassy globules of
eggs are rising into the surface waters. Even in the harsh world of the
winter sea, these eggs will begin the swift divisions by which a granule
of protoplasm becomes a living fishlet.

Most of all, perhaps, there is assurance in the fine dust of life that
remains in the surface waters, the invisible spores of the diatoms,
needing only the touch of warming sun and fertilizing chemicals to
repeat the magic of spring.




[Illustration: _Andreas Feininger_ Fossil remains of a trilobite, an
ancient crustacean of Cambrian seas]

[Illustration: _Photo by Fritz Goro_ (Life) _Above_:  Sargassum fish in
seaweed   _Right, above_:  In summer seas, billions of tiny Noctiluca
gleam like stars   _Right, below_:  Camera reveals living creatures,
tracks, and holes on sea floor]

[Illustration: _Douglas Wilson_ Noctiluca]

[Illustration: _Lamont Geological Observatory_ (Columbia University)
Bottom Organisms]

[Illustration: _Official U. S. Navy Photograph_ Bathyscaphe]

[Illustration: _Official U. S. Navy Photograph_ In the bathyscaphe
_Trieste_ men first penetrated the greatest depths of the sea]

[Illustration: _Lamont Geological Observatory_ (Columbia University)
Coring tube being lowered for sample of bottom.]

[Illustration: _Fathograms_: This sea mount was discovered by the U. S.
Coast and Geodetic Survey’s _Pathfinder_ in the Gulf of Alaska; it rises
9600 feet from the ocean floor and is 857 fathoms below the surface.]




[Illustration]


    _Fathograms_: The U. S. S. _Albatross III_ traced this profile
    of Lydonia Canyon where it cuts across the outer edge of Georges
    Bank.

[Illustration: _Wide World Photos_ The birth of an island]




                           _The Sunless Sea_


                                     WHERE GREAT WHALES COME SAILING BY,
                                         SAIL AND SAIL, WITH UNSHUT EYE.
                                                         —MATTHEW ARNOLD

BETWEEN the sunlit surface waters of the open sea and the hidden hills
and valleys of the ocean floor lies the least-known region of the sea.
These deep, dark waters, with all their mysteries and their unsolved
problems, cover a very considerable part of the earth. The whole world
ocean extends over about three-fourths of the surface of the globe. If
we subtract the shallow areas of the continental shelves and the
scattered banks and shoals, where at least the pale ghost of sunlight
moves over the underlying bottom, there still remains about half the
earth that is covered by miles-deep, lightless water, that has been dark
since the world began.

This region has withheld its secrets more obstinately than any other.
Man, with all his ingenuity, has been able to venture only to its
threshold. Wearing a diving helmet, he can walk on the ocean floor about
10 fathoms down. He can descend to an extreme limit of about 500 feet in
a complete diving suit, so heavily armored that movement is almost
impossible, carrying with him a constant supply of oxygen. Only two men
in all the history of the world have had the experience of descending,
alive, beyond the range of visible light. These men are William Beebe
and Otis Barton. In the bathysphere, they reached a depth of 3028 feet
in the open ocean off Bermuda, in the year 1934. Barton alone, in a
steel sphere known as the benthoscope, descended to the great depth of
4500 feet off California, in the summer of 1949.[2]

Although only a fortunate few can ever visit the deep sea, the precise
instruments of the oceanographer, recording light penetration, pressure,
salinity, and temperature, have given us the materials with which to
reconstruct in imagination these eerie, forbidding regions. Unlike the
surface waters, which are sensitive to every gust of wind, which know
day and night, respond to the pull of sun and moon, and change as the
seasons change, the deep waters are a place where change comes slowly,
if at all. Down beyond the reach of the sun’s rays, there is no
alternation of light and darkness. There is rather an endless night, as
old as the sea itself. For most of its creatures, groping their way
endlessly through its black waters, it must be a place of hunger, where
food is scarce and hard to find, a shelterless place where there is no
sanctuary from ever-present enemies, where one can only move on and on,
from birth to death, through the darkness, confined as in a prison to
his own particular layer of the sea.

They used to say that nothing could live in the deep sea. It was a
belief that must have been easy to accept, for without proof to the
contrary, how could anyone conceive of life in such a place?

A century ago the British biologist Edward Forbes wrote: ‘As we descend
deeper and deeper into this region, the inhabitants become more and more
modified, and fewer and fewer, indicating our approach to an abyss where
life is either extinguished, or exhibits but a few sparks to mark its
lingering presence.’ Yet Forbes urged further exploration of ‘this vast
deep-sea region’ to settle forever the question of the existence of life
at great depths.

Even then, the evidence was accumulating. Sir John Ross, during his
exploration of the arctic seas in 1818, had brought up from a depth of
1000 fathoms mud in which there were worms, ‘thus proving there was
animal life in the bed of the ocean notwithstanding the darkness,
stillness, silence, and immense pressure produced by more than a mile of
superincumbent water.’

Then from the surveying ship _Bulldog_, examining a proposed northern
route for a cable from Faroe to Labrador in 1860, came another report.
The _Bulldog_’s sounding line, which at one place had been allowed to
lie for some time on the bottom at a depth of 1260 fathoms, came up with
13 starfish clinging to it. Through these starfish, the ship’s
naturalist wrote, ‘the deep has sent forth the long coveted message.’
But not all the zoologists of the day were prepared to accept the
message. Some doubters asserted that the starfish had ‘convulsively
embraced’ the line somewhere on the way back to the surface.

In the same year, 1860, a cable in the Mediterranean was raised for
repairs from a depth of 1200 fathoms. It was found to be heavily
encrusted with corals and other sessile animals that had attached
themselves at an early stage of development and grown to maturity over a
period of months or years. There was not the slightest chance that they
had become entangled in the cable as it was being raised to the surface.

Then the _Challenger_, the first ship ever equipped for oceanographic
exploration, set out from England in the year 1872 and traced a course
around the globe. From bottoms lying under miles of water, from silent
deeps carpeted with red clay ooze, and from all the lightless
intermediate depths, net-haul after net-haul of strange and fantastic
creatures came up and were spilled out on the decks. Poring over the
weird beings thus brought up for the first time into the light of clay,
beings no man had ever seen before, the _Challenger_ scientists realized
that life existed even on the deepest floor of the abyss.

The recent discovery that a living cloud of some unknown creatures is
spread over much of the ocean at a depth of several hundred fathoms
below the surface is the most exciting thing that has been learned about
the ocean for many years.

When, during the first quarter of the twentieth-century, echo sounding
was developed to allow ships while under way to record the depth of the
bottom, probably no one suspected that it would also provide a means of
learning something about deep-sea life. But operators of the new
instruments soon discovered that the sound waves, directed downward from
the ship like a beam of light, were reflected back from any solid object
they met. Answering echoes were returned from intermediate depths,
presumably from schools of fish, whales, or submarines; then a second
echo was received from the bottom.

These facts were so well established by the late 1930’s that fishermen
had begun to talk about using their fathometers to search for schools of
herring. Then the war brought the whole subject under strict security
regulations, and little more was heard about it. In 1946, however, the
United States Navy issued a significant bulletin. It was reported that
several scientists, working with sonic equipment in deep water off the
California coast, had discovered a widespread ‘layer’ of some sort,
which gave back an answering echo to the sound waves. This reflecting
layer, seemingly suspended between the surface and the floor of the
Pacific, was found over an area 300 miles wide. It lay from 1000 to 1500
feet below the surface. The discovery was made by three scientists, C.
F. Eyring, R. J. Christensen, and R. W. Raitt, aboard the U.S.S.
_Jasper_ in 1942, and for a time this mysterious phenomenon, of wholly
unknown nature, was called the ECR layer. Then in 1945 Martin W.
Johnson, marine biologist of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
made a further discovery which gave the first clue to the nature of the
layer. Working aboard the vessel _E. W. Scripps_, Johnson found that
whatever sent back the echoes moved upward and downward in rhythmic
fashion, being found near the surface at night, in deep water during the
day. This discovery disposed of speculations that the reflections came
from something inanimate, perhaps a mere physical discontinuity in the
water, and showed that the layer is composed of living creatures capable
of controlled movement.

From this time on, discoveries about the sea’s ‘phantom bottom’ came
rapidly. With widespread use of echo-sounding instruments, it has become
clear that the phenomenon is not something peculiar to the coast of
California alone. It occurs almost universally in the deep ocean
basins—drifting by day at a depth of several hundred fathoms, at night
rising to the surface, and again, before sunrise, sinking into the
depths.

On the passage of the U.S.S. _Henderson_ from San Diego to the Antarctic
in 1947, the reflecting layer was detected during the greater part of
each day, at depths varying from 150 to 450 fathoms, and on a later run
from San Diego to Yokosuka, Japan, the _Henderson_’s fathometer again
recorded the layer every day, suggesting that it exists almost
continuously across the Pacific.

During July and August 1947, the U.S.S. _Nereus_ made a continuous
fathogram from Pearl Harbor to the Arctic and found the scattering layer
over all deep waters along this course. It did not develop, however, in
the shallow Bering and Chuckchee seas. Sometimes in the morning, the
_Nereus_ fathogram showed two layers, responding in different ways to
the growing illumination of the water; both descended into deep water,
but there was an interval of twenty minutes between the two descents.

Despite attempts to sample it or photograph it, no one is sure what the
layer is, although the discovery may be made any day. There are three
principal theories, each of which has its group of supporters. According
to these theories, the sea’s phantom bottom may consist of small
planktonic shrimps, of fishes, or of squids.

As for the plankton theory, one of the most convincing arguments is the
well-known fact that many plankton creatures make regular vertical
migrations of hundreds of feet, rising toward the surface at night,
sinking down below the zone of light penetration very early in the
morning. This is, of course, exactly the behavior of the scattering
layer. Whatever composes it is apparently strongly repelled by sunlight.
The creatures of the layer seem almost to be held prisoner at the
end—or beyond the end—of the sun’s rays throughout the hours of
daylight, waiting only for the welcome return of darkness to hurry
upward into the surface waters. But what is the power that repels; and
what the attraction that draws them surfaceward once the inhibiting
force is removed? Is it comparative safety from enemies that makes them
seek darkness? Is it more abundant food near the surface that lures them
back under cover of night?

Those who say that fish are the reflectors of the sound waves usually
account for the vertical migrations of the layer by suggesting that the
fish are feeding on planktonic shrimp and are following their food. They
believe that the air bladder of a fish is, of all structures concerned,
most likely from its construction to return a strong echo. There is one
outstanding difficulty in the way of accepting this theory: we have no
other evidence that concentrations of fish are universally present in
the oceans. In fact, almost everything else we know suggests that the
really dense populations of fish live over the continental shelves or in
certain very definitely determined zones of the open ocean where food is
particularly abundant. If the reflecting layer is eventually proved to
be composed of fish, the prevailing views of fish distribution will have
to be radically revised.

The most startling theory (and the one that seems to have the fewest
supporters) is that the layer consists of concentrations of squid,
‘hovering below the illuminated zone of the sea and awaiting the arrival
of darkness in which to resume their raids into the plankton-rich
surface waters.’ Proponents of this theory argue that squid are abundant
enough, and of wide enough distribution, to give the echoes that have
been picked up almost everywhere from the equator to the two poles.
Squid are known to be the sole food of the sperm whale, found in the
open oceans in all temperate and tropical waters. They also form the
exclusive diet of the bottlenosed whale and are eaten extensively by
most other toothed whales, by seals, and by many sea birds. All these
facts argue that they must be prodigiously abundant.

It is true that men who have worked close to the sea surface at night
have received vivid impressions of the abundance and activity of squids
in the surface waters in darkness. Long ago Johan Hjort wrote:

    One night we were hauling long lines on the Faroe slope, working
    with an electric lamp hanging over the side in order to see the
    line, when like lightning flashes one squid after another shot
    towards the light . . . In October 1902 we were one night
    steaming outside the slopes of the coast banks of Norway, and
    for many miles we could see the squids moving in the surface
    waters like luminous bubbles, resembling large milky white
    electric lamps being constantly lit and extinguished.[D]

[D] From _The Depths of the Ocean_, by Sir John Murray and Johan Hjort,
1912 edition, Macmillan & Co., p. 649.

-----

Thor Heyerdahl reports that at night his raft was literally bombarded by
squids; and Richard Fleming says that in his oceanographic work off the
coast of Panama it was common to see immense schools of squid gathering
at the surface at night and leaping upward toward the lights that were
used by the men to operate their instruments. But equally spectacular
surface displays of shrimp have been seen, and most people find it
difficult to believe in the ocean-wide abundance of squid.

Deep-water photography holds much promise for the solution of the
mystery of the phantom bottom. There are technical difficulties, such as
the problem of holding a camera still as it swings at the end of a long
cable, twisting and turning, suspended from a ship which itself moves
with the sea. Some of the pictures so taken look as though the
photographer has pointed his camera at a starry sky and swung it in an
arc as he exposed the film. Yet the Norwegian biologist Gunnar Rollefson
had an encouraging experience in correlating photography with echograms.
On the research ship _Johan Hjort_ off the Lofoten Islands, he
persistently got reflection of sound from schools of fish in 20 to 30
fathoms. A specially constructed camera was lowered to the depth
indicated by the echogram. When developed, the film showed moving shapes
of fish at a distance, and a large and clearly recognizable cod appeared
in the beam of light and hovered in front of the lens.

Direct sampling of the layer is the logical means of discovering its
identity, but the problem is to develop large nets that can be operated
rapidly enough to capture swift-moving animals. Scientists at Woods
Hole, Massachusetts, have towed ordinary plankton nets in the layer and
have found that euphausiid shrimps, glassworms, and other deep-water
plankton are concentrated there; but there is still a possibility that
the layer itself may actually be made up of larger forms feeding on the
shrimps—too large or swift to be taken in the presently used nets. New
nets may give the answer. Television is another possibility.[3]

Shadowy and indefinite though they be, these recent indications of an
abundant life at mid-depths agree with the reports of the only observers
who have actually visited comparable depths and brought back eyewitness
accounts of what they saw. William Beebe’s impressions from the
bathysphere were of a life far more abundant and varied than he had been
prepared to find, although, over a period of six years, he had made many
hundreds of net-hauls in the same area. More than a quarter of a mile
down, he reported aggregations of living things ‘as thick as I have ever
seen them.’ At half a mile—the deepest descent of the bathysphere—Dr.
Beebe recalled that ‘there was no instant when a mist of plankton . . .
was not swirling in the path of the beam.’

The existence of an abundant deep-sea fauna was discovered, probably
millions of years ago, by certain whales and also, it now appears, by
seals. The ancestors of all whales, we know by fossil remains, were land
mammals. They must have been predatory beasts, if we are to judge by
their powerful jaws and teeth. Perhaps in their foragings about the
deltas of great rivers or around the edges of shallow seas, they
discovered the abundance of fish and other marine life and over the
centuries formed the habit of following them farther and farther into
the sea. Little by little their bodies took on a form more suitable for
aquatic life; their hind limbs were reduced to rudiments, which may be
discovered in a modern whale by dissection, and the forelimbs were
modified into organs for steering and balancing.

Eventually the whales, as though to divide the sea’s food resources
among them, became separated into three groups: the plankton-caters, the
fish-eaters, and the squid-eaters. The plankton-eating whales can exist
only where there are dense masses of small shrimp or copepods to supply
their enormous food requirements. This limits them, except for scattered
areas, to arctic and antarctic waters and the high temperate latitudes.
Fish-eating whales may find food over a somewhat wider range of ocean,
but they are restricted to places where there are enormous populations
of schooling fish. The blue water of the tropics and of the open ocean
basins offers little to either of these groups. But that immense,
square-headed, formidably toothed whale known as the cachalot or sperm
whale discovered long ago what men have known for only a short
time—that hundreds of fathoms below the almost untenanted surface
waters of these regions there is an abundant animal life. The sperm
whale has taken these deep waters for his hunting grounds; his quarry is
the deep-water population of squids, including the giant squid
Architeuthis, which lives pelagically at depths of 1500 feet or more.
The head of the sperm whale is often marked with long stripes, which
consist of a great number of circular scars made by the suckers of the
squid. From this evidence we can imagine the battles that go on, in the
darkness of the deep water, between these two huge creatures—the sperm
whale with its yo-ton bulk, the squid with a body as long as 30 feet,
and writhing, grasping arms extending the total length of the animal to
perhaps 50 feet.

The greatest depth at which the giant squid lives is not definitely
known, but there is one instructive piece of evidence about the depth to
which sperm whales descend, presumably in search of the squids. In April
1932, the cable repair ship All America was investigating an apparent
break in the submarine cable between Balboa in the Canal Zone and
Esmeraldas, Ecuador. The cable was brought to the surface off the coast
of Colombia. Entangled in it was a dead 45-foot male sperm whale. The
submarine cable was twisted around the lower jaw and was wrapped around
one flipper, the body, and the caudal flukes. The cable was raised from
a depth of 540 fathoms, or 3240 feet.[4]

Some of the seals also appear to have discovered the hidden food
reserves of the deep ocean. It has long been something of a mystery
where, and on what, the northern fur seals of the eastern Pacific feed
during the winter, which they spend off the coast of North America from
California to Alaska. There is no evidence that they are feeding to any
great extent on sardines, mackerel, or other commercially important
fishes. Presumably four million seals could not compete with commercial
fishermen for the same species without the fact being known. But there
is some evidence on the diet of the fur seals, and it is highly
significant. Their stomachs have yielded the bones of a species of fish
that has never been seen alive. Indeed, not even its remains have been
found anywhere except in the stomachs of seals. Ichthyologists say that
this ‘seal fish’ belongs to a group that typically inhabits very deep
water, off the edge of the continental shelf.

How either whales or seals endure the tremendous pressure changes
involved in dives of several hundred fathoms is not definitely known.
They are warm-blooded mammals like ourselves. Caisson disease, which is
caused by the rapid accumulation of nitrogen bubbles in the blood with
sudden release of pressure, kills human divers if they are brought up
rapidly from depths of 200 feet or so. Yet, according to the testimony
of whalers, a baleen whale, when harpooned, can dive straight down to a
depth of half a mile, as measured by the amount of line carried out.
From these depths, where it has sustained a pressure of half a ton on
every inch of body, it returns almost immediately to the surface. The
most plausible explanation is that, unlike the diver, who has air pumped
to him while he is under water, the whale has in its body only the
limited supply it carries down, and does not have enough nitrogen in its
blood to do serious harm. The plain truth is, however, that we really do
not know, since it is obviously impossible to confine a living whale and
experiment on it, and almost as difficult to dissect a dead one
satisfactorily.

At first thought it seems a paradox that creatures of such great
fragility as the glass sponge and the jellyfish can live under the
conditions of immense pressure that prevail in deep water. For creatures
at home in the deep sea, however, the saving fact is that the pressure
inside their tissues is the same as that without, and, as long as this
balance is preserved, they are no more inconvenienced by a pressure of a
ton or so than we are by ordinary atmospheric pressure. And most abyssal
creatures, it must be remembered, live out their whole lives in a
comparatively restricted zone, and are never required to adjust
themselves to extreme changes of pressure.

But of course there are exceptions, and the real miracle of sea life in
relation to great pressure is not the animal that lives its whole life
on the bottom, bearing a pressure of perhaps five or six tons, but those
that regularly move up and down through hundreds or thousands of feet of
vertical change. The small shrimps and other planktonic creatures that
descend into deep water during the day are examples. Fish that possess
air bladders, on the other hand, are vitally affected by abrupt changes
of pressure, as anyone knows who has seen a trawler’s net raised from a
hundred fathoms. Apart from the accident of being captured in a net and
hauled up through waters of rapidly diminishing pressures, fish may
sometimes wander out of the zone to which they are adjusted and find
themselves unable to return. Perhaps in their pursuit of food they roam
upward to the ceiling of the zone that is theirs, and beyond whose
invisible boundary they may not stray without meeting alien and
inhospitable conditions. Moving from layer to layer of drifting plankton
as they feed, they may pass beyond the boundary. In the lessened
pressure of these upper waters the gas enclosed within the air bladder
expands. The fish becomes lighter and more buoyant. Perhaps he tries to
fight his way down again, opposing the upward lift with all the power of
his muscles. If he does not succeed, he ‘falls’ to the surface, injured
and dying, for the abrupt release of pressure from without causes
distension and rupture of the tissues.

The compression of the sea under its own weight is relatively slight,
and there is no basis for the old and picturesque belief that, at the
deeper levels, the water resists the downward passage of objects from
the surface. According to this belief, sinking ships, the bodies of
drowned men, and presumably the bodies of the larger sea animals not
consumed above by hungry scavengers, never reach the bottom, but come to
rest at some level determined by the relation of their own weight to the
compression of the water, there to drift forever. The fact is that
anything will continue to sink as long as its specific gravity is
greater than that of the surrounding water, and all large bodies
descend, in a matter of a few days, to the ocean floor. As mute
testimony to this fact, we bring up from the deepest ocean basins the
teeth of sharks and the hard ear bones of whales.

Nevertheless the weight of sea water—the pressing down of miles of
water upon all the underlying layers—does have a certain effect upon
the water itself. If this downward compression could suddenly be relaxed
by some miraculous suspension of natural laws, the sea level would rise
about 93 feet all over the world. This would shift the Atlantic
coastline of the United States westward a hundred miles or more and
alter other familiar geographic outlines all over the world.

Immense pressure, then, is one of the governing conditions of life in
the deep sea; darkness is another. The unrelieved darkness of the deep
waters has produced weird and incredible modifications of the abyssal
fauna. It is a blackness so divorced from the world of the sunlight that
probably only the few men who have seen it with their own eyes can
visualize it. We know that light fades out rapidly with descent below
the surface. The red rays are gone at the end of the first 200 or 300
feet, and with them all the orange and yellow warmth of the sun. Then
the greens fade out, and at 1000 feet only a deep, dark, brilliant blue
is left. In very clear waters the violet rays of the spectrum may
penetrate another thousand feet. Beyond this is only the blackness of
the deep sea.

In a curious way, the colors of marine animals tend to be related to the
zone in which they live. Fishes of the surface waters, like the mackerel
and herring, often are blue or green; so are the floats of the
Portuguese men-of-war and the azure-tinted wings of the swimming snails.
Down below the diatom meadows and the drifting sargassum weed, where the
water becomes ever more deeply, brilliantly blue, many creatures are
crystal clear. Their glassy, ghostly forms blend with their surroundings
and make it easier for them to elude the ever-present, ever-hungry
enemy. Such are the transparent hordes of the arrowworms or glassworms,
the comb jellies, and the larvae of many fishes.

At a thousand feet, and on down to the very end of the sun’s rays,
silvery fishes are common, and many others are red, drab brown, or
black. Pteropods are a dark violet. Arrowworms, whose relatives in the
upper layers are colorless, are here a deep red. Jellyfish medusae,
which above would be transparent, at a depth of 1000 feet are a deep
brown.

At depths greater than 1500 feet, all the fishes are black, deep violet,
or brown, but the prawns wear amazing hues of red, scarlet, and purple.
Why, no one can say. Since all the red rays are strained out of the
water far above this depth, the scarlet raiment of these creatures can
only look black to their neighbors.

The deep sea has its stars, and perhaps here and there an eerie and
transient equivalent of moonlight, for the mysterious phenomenon of
luminescence is displayed by perhaps half of all the fishes that live in
dimly lit or darkened waters, and by many of the lower forms as well.
Many fishes carry luminous torches that can be turned on or off at will,
presumably helping them find or pursue their prey. Others have rows of
lights over their bodies, in patterns that vary from species to species
and may be a sort of recognition mark or badge by which the bearer can
be known as friend or enemy. The deep-sea squid ejects a spurt of fluid
that becomes a luminous cloud, the counterpart of the ‘ink’ of his
shallow-water relative.

Down beyond the reach of even the longest and strongest of the sun’s
rays, the eyes of fishes become enlarged, as though to make the most of
any chance illumination of whatever sort, or they may become telescopic,
large of lens, and protruding. In deep-sea fishes, hunting always in
dark waters, the eyes tend to lose the ‘cones’ or color-perceiving cells
of the retina, and to increase the ‘rods,’ which perceive dim light.
Exactly the same modification is seen on land among the strictly
nocturnal prowlers which, like abyssal fish, never see the sunlight.

In their world of darkness, it would seem likely that some of the
animals might have become blind, as has happened to some cave fauna. So,
indeed, many of them have, compensating for the lack of eyes with
marvelously developed feelers and long, slender fins and processes with
which they grope their way, like so many blind men with canes, their
whole knowledge of friends, enemies, or food coming to them through the
sense of touch.

The last traces of plant life are left behind in the thin upper layer of
water, for no plant can live below about 600 feet even in very clear
water, and few find enough sunlight for their food-manufacturing
activities below 200 feet. Since no animal can make its own food, the
creatures of the deeper waters live a strange, almost parasitic
existence of utter dependence on the upper layers. These hungry
carnivores prey fiercely and relentlessly upon each other, yet the whole
community is ultimately dependent upon the slow rain of descending food
particles from above. The components of this never-ending rain are the
dead and dying plants and animals from the surface, or from one of the
intermediate layers. For each of the horizontal zones or communities of
the sea that lie, in tier after tier, between the surface and the sea
bottom, the food supply is different and in general poorer than for the
layer above. There is a hint of the fierce and uncompromising
competition for food in the saber-toothed jaws of some of the small,
dragonlike fishes of the deeper waters, in the immense mouths and in the
elastic and distensible bodies that make it possible for a fish to
swallow another several times its size, enjoying swift repletion after a
long fast.

Pressure, darkness, and—we should have added only a few years
ago—silence, are the conditions of life in the deep sea. But we know
now that the conception of the sea as a silent place is wholly false.
Wide experience with hydrophones and other listening devices for the
detection of submarines has proved that, around the shore lines of much
of the world, there is an extraordinary uproar produced by fishes,
shrimps, porpoises, and probably other forms not yet identified. There
has been little investigation as yet of sound in the deep, offshore
areas, but when the crew of the _Atlantis_ lowered a hydrophone into
deep water off Bermuda, they recorded strange mewing sounds, shrieks,
and ghostly moans, the sources of which have not been traced. But fish
of shallower zones have been captured and confined in aquaria, where
their voices have been recorded for comparison with sounds heard at sea,
and in many cases satisfactory identification can be made.

During the Second World War the hydrophone network set up by the United
States Navy to protect the entrance to Chesapeake Bay was temporarily
made useless when, in the spring of 1942, the speakers at the surface
began to give forth, every evening, a sound described as being like ‘a
pneumatic drill tearing up pavement.’ The extraneous noises that came
over the hydrophones completely masked the sounds of the passage of
ships. Eventually it was discovered that the sounds were the voices of
fish known as croakers, which in the spring move into Chesapeake Bay
from their offshore wintering grounds. As soon as the noise had been
identified and analyzed, it was possible to screen it out with an
electric filter, so that once more only the sounds of ships came through
the speakers.

Later in the same year, a chorus of croakers was discovered off the pier
of the Scripps Institution at La Jolla. Every year from May until late
September the evening chorus begins about sunset, and ‘increases
gradually to a steady uproar of harsh froggy croaks, with a background
of soft drumming. This continues unabated for two to three hours and
finally tapers off to individual outbursts at rare intervals.’ Several
species of croakers isolated in aquaria gave sounds similar to the
‘froggy croaks,’ but the authors of the soft background
drumming—presumably another species of croaker—have not yet been
discovered.

One of the most extraordinarily widespread sounds of the undersea is the
crackling, sizzling sound, like dry twigs burning or fat frying, heard
near beds of the snapping shrimp. This is a small, round shrimp, about
half an inch in diameter, with one very large claw which it uses to stun
its prey. The shrimp are forever clicking the two joints of this claw
together, and it is the thousands of clicks that collectively produce
the noise known as shrimp crackle. No one had any idea the little
snapping shrimps were so abundant or so widely distributed until their
signals began to be picked up on hydrophones. They have been heard all
over a broad band that extends around the world, between latitudes 35° N
and 35° S, (for example, from Cape Hatteras to Buenos Aires) in ocean
waters less than 30 fathoms deep.

Mammals as well as fishes and crustaceans contribute to the undersea
chorus. Biologists listening through a hydrophone in an estuary of the
St. Lawrence River heard ‘high-pitched resonant whistles and squeals,
varied with the ticking and clucking sounds slightly reminiscent of a
string orchestra tuning up, as well as mewing and occasional chirps.’
This remarkable medley of sounds was heard only while schools of the
white porpoise were seen passing up or down the river, and so was
assumed to be produced by them.[5]

The mysteriousness, the eerieness, the ancient unchangingness of the
great depths have led many people to suppose that some very old forms of
life—some ‘living fossils’—may be lurking undiscovered in the deep
ocean. Some such hope may have been in the minds of the _Challenger_
scientists. The forms they brought up in their nets were weird enough,
and most of them had never before been seen by man. But basically they
were modern types. There was nothing like the trilobites of Cambrian
time or the sea scorpions of the Silurian, nothing reminiscent of the
great marine reptiles that invaded the sea in the Mesozoic. Instead,
there were modern fishes, squids, and shrimps, strangely and grotesquely
modified, to be sure, for life in the difficult deep-sea world, but
clearly types that have developed in rather recent geologic time.

Far from being the original home of life, the deep sea has probably been
inhabited for a relatively short time. While life was developing and
flourishing in the surface waters, along the shores, and perhaps in the
rivers and swamps, two immense regions of the earth still forbade
invasion by living things. These were the continents and the abyss. As
we have seen, the immense difficulties of surviving on land were first
overcome by colonists from the sea about 300 million years ago. The
abyss, with its unending darkness, its crushing pressures, its glacial
cold, presented even more formidable difficulties. Probably the
successful invasion of this region—at least by higher forms of
life—occurred somewhat later.

Yet in recent years there have been one or two significant happenings
that have kept alive the hope that the deep sea may, after all, conceal
strange links with the past. In December 1938, off the southeast tip of
Africa, an amazing fish was caught alive in a trawl—a fish that was
supposed to have been dead for at least 60 million years! This is to
say, the last known fossil remains of its kind date from the Cretaceous,
and no living example had been recognized in historic time until this
lucky net-haul.

The fishermen who brought it up in their trawl from a depth of only 40
fathoms realized that this five-foot, bright blue fish, with its large
head and strangely shaped scales, fins, and tail, was different from
anything they had ever caught before, and on their return to port they
took it to the nearest museum. This single specimen of Latimeria, as the
fish was christened, is so far the only one that has been captured, and
it seems a reasonable guess that it may inhabit depths below those
ordinarily fished, and that the South African specimen was a stray from
its usual habitat.[6]

Occasionally a very primitive type of shark, known from its puckered
gills as a ‘frillshark,’ is taken in waters between a quarter of a mile
and half a mile down. Most of these have been caught in Norwegian and
Japanese waters—there are only about 50 preserved in the museums of
Europe and America—but recently one was captured off Santa Barbara,
California. The frillshark has many anatomical features similar to those
of the ancient sharks that lived 25 to 30 million years ago. It has too
many gills and too few dorsal fins for a modern shark, and its teeth,
like those of fossil sharks, are three-pronged and briarlike. Some
ichthyologists regard it as a relic derived from very ancient shark
ancestors that have died out in the upper waters but, through this
single species, are still carrying on their struggle for earthly
survival, in the quiet of the deep sea.

Possibly there are other such anachronisms lurking down in these regions
of which we know so little, but they are likely to be few and scattered.
The terms of existence in these deep waters are far too uncompromising
to support life unless that life is plastic, molding itself constantly
to the harsh conditions, seizing every advantage that makes possible the
survival of living protoplasm in a world only a little less hostile than
the black reaches of interplanetary space.




                             _Hidden Lands_


                                     SAND-STREWN CAVERNS, COOL AND DEEP,
                                         WHERE THE WINDS ARE ALL ASLEEP.
                                                         —MATTHEW ARNOLD

THE first European ever to sail across the wide Pacific was curious
about the hidden worlds beneath his ship. Between the two coral islands
of St. Paul and Los Tiburones in the Tuamotu Archipelago, Magellan
ordered his sounding line to be lowered. It was the conventional line
used by explorers of the day, no more than 200 fathoms long. It did not
touch bottom, and Magellan declared that he was over the deepest part of
the ocean. Of course he was completely mistaken, but the occasion was
none the less historic. It was the first time in the history of the
world that a navigator had attempted to sound the depths of the open
ocean.

Three centuries later, in the year 1839, Sir James Clark Ross set out
from England in command of two ships with names of dark foreboding, the
_Erebus_ and the _Terror_, bound for the ‘utmost navigable limits of the
Antarctic Ocean.’ As he proceeded on his course he tried repeatedly to
obtain soundings, but failed for lack of a proper line. Finally he had
one constructed on board, of ‘three thousand six hundred fathoms, or
rather more than four miles in length. . . . On the 3rd of January, in
latitude 27° 26´ S., longitude 17° 29´ W., the weather and all other
circumstances being propitious, we succeeded in obtaining soundings with
two thousand four hundred and twenty-five fathoms of line, a depression
of the bed of the ocean beneath its surface very little short of the
elevation of Mount Blanc above it.’ This was the first successful
abyssal sounding.

But taking soundings in the deep ocean was, and long remained, a
laborious and time-consuming task, and knowledge of the undersea
topography lagged considerably behind our acquaintance with the
landscape of the near side of the moon. Over the years, methods were
improved. For the heavy hemp line used by Ross, Maury of the United
States Navy substituted a strong twine, and in 1870 Lord Kelvin used
piano wire. Even with improved gear a deep-water sounding required
several hours or sometimes an entire day. By 1854, when Maury collected
all available records, only 180 deep soundings were available from the
Atlantic, and by the time that modern echo sounding was developed, the
total that had been taken from all the ocean basins of the world was
only about 15,000. This is roughly one sounding for an area of 6000
square miles.

Now hundreds of vessels are equipped with sonic sounding instruments
that trace a continuous profile of the bottom beneath the moving ship
(although only a few can obtain profiles at depths greater than 2000
fathoms[7]). Soundings are accumulating much faster than they can be
plotted on the charts. Little by little, like the details of a huge map
being filled in by an artist, the hidden contours of the ocean are
emerging. But, even with this recent progress, it will be years before
an accurate and detailed relief map of the ocean basins can be
constructed.

The general bottom topography is, however, well established. Once we
have passed the tide lines, the three great geographic provinces of
ocean are the continental shelves, the continental slopes, and the floor
of the deep sea. Each of these regions is as different from the others
as an arctic tundra from a range of the Rocky Mountains.

The continental shelf is of the sea, yet of all regions of the ocean it
is most like the land. Sunlight penetrates to all but its deepest parts.
Plants drift in the waters above it; seaweeds cling to its rocks and
sway to the passage of the waves. Familiar fishes—unlike the weird
monsters of the abyss—move over its plains like herds of cattle. Much
of its substance is derived from the land—the sand and the rock
fragments and the rich topsoil carried by running water to the sea and
gently deposited on the shelf. Its submerged valleys and hills, in
appropriate parts of the world, have been carved by glaciers into a
topography much like the northern landscapes we know and the terrain is
strewn with rocks and gravel deposited by the moving ice sheets. Indeed
many parts (or perhaps all) of the shelf have been dry land in the
geologic past, for a comparatively slight fall of sea level has
sufficed, time and again, to expose it to wind and sun and rain. The
Grand Banks of Newfoundland rose above the ancient seas and were
submerged again. The Dogger Bank of the North Sea shelf was once a
forested land inhabited by prehistoric beasts; now its ‘forests’ are
seaweeds and its ‘beasts’ are fishes.

Of all parts of the sea, the continental shelves are perhaps most
directly important to man as a source of material things. The great
fisheries of the world, with only a few exceptions, are confined to the
relatively shallow waters over the continental shelves. Seaweeds are
gathered from their submerged plains to make scores of substances used
in foods, drugs, and articles of commerce. As the petroleum reserves
left on continental areas by ancient seas become depleted, petroleum
geologists look more and more to the oil that may lie, as yet unmapped
and unexploited, under these bordering lands of the sea.

The shelves begin at the tidelines and extend seaward as gently sloping
plains. The 100-fathom contour used to be taken as the boundary between
the continental shelf and the slope; now it is customary to place the
division wherever the gentle declivity of the shelf changes abruptly to
a steeper descent toward abyssal depths. The world over, the average
depth at which this change occurs is about 72 fathoms; the greatest
depth of any shelf is probably 200 to 300 fathoms.

Nowhere off the Pacific coast of the United States is the continental
shelf much more than 20 miles wide—a narrowness characteristic of
coasts bordered by young mountains perhaps still in the process of
formation. On the American east coast, however, north of Cape Hatteras
the shelf is as much as 150 miles wide. But at Hatteras and off southern
Florida it is merely the narrowest of thresholds to the sea. Here its
scant development seems to be related to the press of that great and
rapidly flowing river-in-the-sea, the Gulf Stream, which at these places
swings close inshore.

The widest shelves in all the world are those bordering the Arctic. The
Barents Sea shelf is 750 miles across. It is also relatively deep, lying
for the most part 100 to 200 fathoms below the surface, as though its
floor had sagged and been down-warped under the load of glacial ice. It
is scored by deep troughs between which banks and islands rise—further
evidence of the work of the ice. The deepest shelves surround the
Antarctic continent, where soundings in many areas show depths of
several hundred fathoms near the coast and continuing out across the
shelf.

Once beyond the edge of the shelf, as we visualize the steeper
declivities of the continental slope, we begin to feel the mystery and
the alien quality of the deep sea—the gathering darkness, the growing
pressure, the starkness of a seascape in which all plant life has been
left behind and there are only the unrelieved contours of rock and clay,
of mud and sand.

Biologically the world of the continental slope, like that of the abyss,
is a world of animals—a world of carnivores where each creature preys
upon another. For no plants live here, and the only ones that drift down
from above are the dead husks of the flora of the sunlit waters. Most of
the slopes are below the zone of surface wave action, yet the moving
water masses of the ocean currents press against them in their coastwise
passage; the pulse of the tide beats against them; they feel the surge
of the deep, internal waves.

Geographically, the slopes are the most imposing features of all the
surface of the earth. They are the walls of the deep-sea basins. They
are the farthermost bounds of the continents, the true place of
beginning of the sea. The slopes are the longest and highest escarpments
found anywhere on the earth; their average height is 12,000 feet, but in
some places they reach the immense height of 30,000 feet. No continental
mountain range has so great a difference of elevation between its
foothills and its peaks.

Nor is the grandeur of slope topography confined to steepness and
height. The slopes are the site of one of the most mysterious features
of the sea. These are the submarine canyons with their steep cliffs and
winding valleys cutting back into the walls of the continents. The
canyons have now been found in so many parts of the world that when
soundings have been taken in presently unexplored areas we shall
probably find that they are of worldwide occurrence. Geologists say that
some of the canyons were formed well within the most recent division of
geologic time, the Cenozoic, most of them probably within the
Pleistocene, a million years ago, or less. But how and by what they were
carved, no one can say. Their origin is one of the most hotly disputed
problems of the ocean.

Only the fact that the canyons are deeply hidden in the darkness of the
sea (many extending a mile or more below present sea level) prevents
them from being classed with the world’s most spectacular scenery. The
comparison with the Grand Canyon of the Colorado is irresistible. Like
river-cut land canyons, sea canyons are deep and winding valleys,
V-shaped in cross section, their walls sloping down at a steep angle to
a narrow floor. The location of many of the largest ones suggests a past
connection with some of the great rivers of the earth of our time.
Hudson Canyon, one of the largest on the Atlantic coast, is separated by
only a shallow sill from a long valley that wanders for more than a
hundred miles across the continental shelf, originating at the entrance
of New York Harbor and the estuary of the Hudson River. There are large
canyons off the Congo, the Indus, the Ganges, the Columbia, the Sāo
Francisco, and the Mississippi, according to Francis Shepard, one of the
principal students of the canyon problem. Monterey Canyon in California,
Professor Shepard points out, is located off an old mouth of the Salinas
River; the Cap Breton Canyon in France appears to have no relation to an
existing river but actually lies off an old fifteenth-century mouth of
the Adour River.

Their shape and apparent relation to existing rivers have led Shepard to
suggest that the submarine canyons were cut by rivers at some time when
their gorges were above sea level. The relative youth of the canyons
seems to relate them to some happenings in the world of the Ice Age. It
is generally agreed that sea level was lowered during the existence of
the great glaciers, for water was withdrawn from the sea and frozen in
the ice sheet. But most geologists say that the sea was lowered only a
few hundred feet—not the mile that would be necessary to account for
the canyons. According to one theory, there were heavy submarine mud
flows during the times when the glaciers were advancing and sea level
fell the lowest; mud stirred up by waves poured down the continental
slopes and scoured out the canyons. Since none of the present evidence
is conclusive, however, we simply do not know how the canyons came into
being, and their mystery remains.[8]

The floor of the deep ocean basins is probably as old as the sea itself.
In all the hundreds of millions of years that have intervened since the
formation of the abyss, these deeper depressions have never, as far as
we can learn, been drained of their covering waters. While the bordering
shelves of the continents have known, in alternating geologic ages, now
the surge of waves and again the eroding tools of rain and wind and
frost, always the abyss has lain under the all-enveloping cover of
miles-deep water.

But this does not mean that the contours of the abyss have remained
unchanged since the day of its creation. The floor of the sea, like the
stuff of the continents, is a thin crust over the plastic mantle of the
earth. It is here thrust up into folds and wrinkles as the interior
cools by imperceptible degrees and shrinks away from its covering layer;
there it falls away into deep trenches in answer to the stresses and
strains of crustal adjustment; and again it pushes up into the conelike
shapes of undersea mountains as volcanoes boil upward from fissures in
the crust.

Until very recent years, it has been the fashion of geographers and
oceanographers to speak of the floor of the deep sea as a vast and
comparatively level plain. The existence of certain topographic features
was recognized, as, for example, the Atlantic Ridge and a number of very
deep depressions like the Mindanao Trench off the Philippines. But these
were considered to be rather exceptional interruptions of a flat floor
that otherwise showed little relief.

This legend of the flatness of the ocean floor was thoroughly destroyed
by the Swedish Deep-Sea Expedition, which sailed from Göteborg in the
summer of 1947 and spent the following 15 months exploring the bed of
the ocean. While the Swedish _Albatross_ was crossing the Atlantic in
the direction of the Panama Canal, the scientists aboard were astonished
by the extreme ruggedness of the ocean floor. Rarely did their
fathometers reveal more than a few consecutive miles of level plain.
Instead the bottom profile rose and fell in curious steps constructed on
a Gargantuan scale, half a mile to several miles wide. In the Pacific,
the uneven bottom contours made it difficult to use many of the
oceanographic instruments. More than one coring tube was left behind,
probably lodged in some undersea crevasse.

One of the exceptions to a hilly or mountainous floor was in the Indian
Ocean, where, southeast of Ceylon, the _Albatross_ ran for several
hundred miles across a level plain. Attempts to take bottom samples from
this plain had little success, for the corers were broken repeatedly,
suggesting that the bottom was hardened lava and that the whole vast
plateau might have been formed by the outpourings of submarine volcanoes
on a stupendous scale. Perhaps this lava plain under the Indian Ocean is
an undersea counterpart of the great basaltic plateau in the eastern
part of the State of Washington, or of the Deccan plateau of India,
built of basaltic rock 10,000 feet thick.

In parts of the Atlantic basin the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution’s vessel _Atlantis_ has found a flat plain occupying much of
the ocean basin from Bermuda to the Atlantic Ridge and also to the east
of the Ridge. Only a series of knolls, probably of volcanic origin,
interrupts the even contours of the plains. These particular regions are
so flat that it seems they must have remained largely undisturbed,
receiving deposits of sediments over an immense period of time.

The deepest depressions on the floor of the sea occur not in the centers
of the oceanic basins as might be expected, but near the continents. One
of the deepest trenches of all, the Mindanao, lies east of the
Philippines and is an awesome pit in the sea, six and a half miles
deep.[9] The Tuscarora Trench east of Japan, nearly as deep, is one of a
series of long, narrow trenches that border the convex outer rim of a
chain of islands including the Bonins, the Marianas, and the Palaus. On
the seaward side of the Aleutian Islands is another group of trenches.
The greatest deeps of the Atlantic lie adjacent to the islands of the
West Indies, and also below Cape Horn, where other curving chains of
islands go out like stepping stones into the Southern Ocean. And again
in the Indian Ocean the curving island arcs of the East Indies have
their accompanying deeps.

Always there is this association of island arcs and deep trenches, and
always the two occur only in areas of volcanic unrest. The pattern, it
is now agreed, is associated with mountain making and the sharp
adjustments of the sea floor that accompany it. On the concave side of
the island arcs are rows of volcanoes. On the convex side there is a
sharp down-bending of the ocean floor, which results in the deep
trenches with their broad V-shape. The two forces seem to be in a kind
of uneasy balance: the upward folding of the earth’s crust to form
mountains, and the thrusting down of the crust of the sea floor into the
basaltic substance of the underlying layer. Sometimes, it seems, the
down-thrust mass of granite has shattered and risen again to form
islands. Such is the supposed origin of Barbados in the West Indies and
of Timor in the East Indies. Both have deep-sea deposits, as though they
had once been part of the sea floor. Yet this must be exceptional. In
the words of the great geologist Daly,

    Another property of the earth is its ability . . . to resist
    shearing pressures indefinitely . . . The continents,
    overlooking the sea bottom, stubbornly refuse to creep thither.
    The rock under the Pacific is strong enough to bear, with no
    known time limit, the huge stresses involved by the down-thrust
    of the crust at the Tonga Deep, and by the erection of the
    10,000-meter dome of lavas and other volcanic products
    represented in the island of Hawaii.[E]

[E] From _The Changing World of the Ice Age_, 1934 edition, Yale
University Press, p. 116.

-----

The least-known region of the ocean floor lies under the Arctic Sea. The
physical difficulties of sounding here are enormous. A permanent sheet
of ice, as much as fifteen feet thick, covers the whole central basin
and is impenetrable to ships. Peary took several soundings in the course
of his dash to the Pole by dog team in 1909. On one attempt a few miles
from the Pole the wire broke with 1500 fathoms out. In 1927 Sir Hubert
Wilkins landed his plane on the ice 550 miles north of Point Barrow and
obtained a single echo sounding of 2975 fathoms, the deepest ever
recorded from the Arctic Sea. Vessels deliberately frozen into the ice
(such as the Norwegian _Fram_ and the Russian _Sedov_ and _Sadko_) in
order to drift with it across the basin have obtained most of the depth
records available for the central parts. In 1937 and 1938 Russian
scientists were landed near the Pole and supplied by plane while they
lived on the ice, drifting with it. These men took nearly a score of
deep soundings.

The most daring plan for sounding the Arctic Sea was conceived by
Wilkins, who actually set out in the submarine _Nautilus_ in 1931 with
the intention of traveling beneath the ice across the entire basin from
Spitsbergen to Bering Strait. Mechanical failure of the diving equipment
a few days after the _Nautilus_ left Spitsbergen prevented the execution
of the plan. By the middle 1940’s, the total of soundings for deep
arctic areas by all methods was only about 150, leaving most of the top
of the world an unsounded sea whose contours can only be guessed. Soon
after the close of the Second World War, the United States Navy began
tests of a new method of obtaining soundings through the ice, which may
provide the key to the arctic riddle. One interesting speculation to be
tested by future soundings is that the mountain chain that bisects the
Atlantic, and has been supposed to reach its northern terminus at
Iceland, may actually continue across the arctic basin to the coast of
Russia. The belt of earthquake epicenters that follows the Atlantic
Ridge seems to extend across the Arctic Sea, and where there are
submarine earthquakes it is at least reasonable to guess that there may
be mountainous topography.[10]

A new feature on recent maps of undersea relief—something never
included before the 1940’s—is a group of about 160 curious, flat-topped
sea mounts between Hawaii and the Marianas. It happened that a Princeton
University geologist, H. H. Hess, was in command of the U.S.S. _Cape
Johnson_ during two years of the wartime cruising of this vessel in the
Pacific. Hess was immediately struck by the number of these undersea
mountains that appeared on the fathograms of the vessel. Time after
time, as the moving pen of the fathometer traced the depth contours it
would abruptly begin to rise in an outline of a steep-sided sea mount,
standing solitarily on the bed of the sea. Unlike a typical volcanic
cone, all of the mounts have broad, flat tops, as though the peaks had
been cut off and planed down by waves. But the summits of the sea mounts
are anywhere from half a mile to a mile or more below the surface of the
sea. How they acquired their flat-topped contours is a mystery perhaps
as great as that of the submarine canyons.

Unlike the scattered sea mounts, the long ranges of undersea mountains
have been marked on the charts for a good many years. The Atlantic Ridge
was discovered about a century ago. The early surveys for the route of
the trans-Atlantic cable gave the first hint of its existence. The
German oceanographic vessel _Meteor_, which crossed and recrossed the
Atlantic during the 1920’s, established the contours of much of the
Ridge. The _Atlantis_ of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution has
spent several summers in an exhaustive study of the Ridge in the general
vicinity of the Azores.

Now we can trace the outlines of this great mountain range, and dimly we
begin to see the details of its hidden peaks and valleys. The Ridge
rises in mid-Atlantic near Iceland. From this far-northern latitude it
runs south midway between the continents, crosses the equator into the
South Atlantic, and continues to about 50° south latitude, where it
turns sharply eastward under the tip of Africa and runs toward the
Indian Ocean. Its general course closely parallels the coastlines of the
bordering continents, even to the definite flexure at the equator
between the hump of Brazil and the eastward-curving coast of Africa. To
some people this curvature has suggested that the Ridge was once part of
a great continental mass, left behind in mid-ocean when, according to
one theory, the continents of North and South America drifted away from
Europe and Africa. However, recent work shows that on the floor of the
Atlantic there are thick masses of sediments which must have required
hundreds of millions of years for their accumulation.

Throughout much of its 10,000-mile length, the Atlantic Ridge is a place
of disturbed and uneasy movements of the ocean floor, and the whole
Ridge gives the impression of something formed by the interplay of
great, opposing forces. From its western foothills across to where its
slopes roll down into the eastern Atlantic basin, the range is about
twice as wide as the Andes and several times the width of the
Appalachians. Near the equator a deep gash cuts across it from east to
west—the Romanche Trench. This is the only point of communication
between the deep basins of the eastern and western Atlantic, although
among its higher peaks there are other, lesser mountain passes.

The greater part of the Ridge is, of course, submerged. Its central
backbone rises some 5000 to 10,000 feet above the sea floor, but another
mile of water lies above most of its summits. Yet here and there a peak
thrusts itself up out of the darkness of deep water and pushes above the
surface of the ocean. These are the islands of the mid-Atlantic. The
highest peak of the Ridge is Pico Island of the Azores. It rises 27,000
feet above the ocean floor, with only its upper 7000 to 8000 feet
emergent. The sharpest peaks of the Ridge are the cluster of islets
known as the Rocks of St. Paul, near the equator. The entire cluster of
half a dozen islets is not more than a quarter of a mile across, and
their rocky slopes drop off at so sheer an angle that water more than
half a mile deep lies only a few feet off shore. The sultry volcanic
bulk of Ascension is another peak of the Atlantic Ridge; so are Tristan
da Cunha, Gough, and Bouvet.

But most of the Ridge lies forever hidden from human eyes. Its contours
have been made out only indirectly by the marvelous probings of sound
waves; bits of its substance have been brought up to us by corers and
dredges; and some details of its landscape have been photographed with
deep-sea cameras. With these aids our imaginations can picture the
grandeur of the undersea mountains, with their sheer cliffs and rocky
terraces, their deep valleys and towering peaks. If we are to compare
the ocean’s mountains with anything on the continents, we must think of
terrestrial mountains far above the timber line, with their silent
snow-filled valleys and their naked rocks swept by the winds. For the
sea has an inverted ‘timber line’ or plant line, below which no
vegetation can grow. The slopes of the undersea mountains are far beyond
the reach of the sun’s rays, and there are only the bare rocks, and, in
the valleys, the deep drifts of sediments that have been silently piling
up through the millions upon millions of years.

Neither the Pacific Ocean nor the Indian Ocean has any submerged
mountains that compare in length with the Atlantic Ridge, but they have
their smaller ranges. The Hawaiian Islands are the peaks of a mountain
range that runs across the central Pacific basin for a distance of
nearly 2000 miles. The Gilbert and Marshall islands stand on the
shoulders of another mid-Pacific mountain chain. In the eastern Pacific,
a broad plateau connects the coast of South America and the Tuamotu
Islands in the mid-Pacific, and in the Indian Ocean a long ridge runs
from India to Antarctica, for most of its length broader and deeper than
the Atlantic Ridge.

One of the most fascinating fields for speculation is the age of the
submarine mountains compared with that of past and present mountains of
the continents. Looking back over the past ages of geologic time (page
10), we realize that mountains have been thrust up on the continents, to
the accompaniment of volcanic outpourings and violent tremblings of the
earth, only to crumble and wear away under the attacks of rain and frost
and flood. What of the sea’s mountains? Were they formed in the same way
and do they, too, begin to die as soon as they are born?

There are indications that the earth’s crust is no more stable under sea
than on land. Quite a fair proportion of the world’s earthquakes are
traced through seismographs to sources under the oceans, and, as we
shall see later, there are probably as many active volcanoes under water
as on land. Apparently the Atlantic Ridge arose along a line of crustal
shifting and rearrangement; although its volcanic fires seem to be
largely quiescent, it is at present the site of most of the earthquakes
in the Atlantic area. Almost the whole continental rim of the Pacific
basin is aquiver with earthquakes and fiery with volcanoes, some
frequently active, some extinct, some merely sleeping a centuries-long
sleep between periods of explosive violence. From the high mountains
that form an almost continuous border around the shores of the Pacific,
the contours of the land slope abruptly down to very deep water. The
deep trenches that lie off the coast of South America, from Alaska along
the Aleutian Islands and across to Japan, and southward off Japan and
the Philippines give the impression of a landscape in process of
formation, of a zone of earth subject to great strains.

Yet the submarine mountains are earth’s nearest approach to the ‘eternal
hills’ of the poets. No sooner is a continental mountain thrust up than
all the forces of nature conspire to level it. A mountain of the deep
sea, in the years of its maturity, is beyond the reach of the ordinary
erosive forces. It grows up on the ocean floor and may thrust volcanic
peaks above the surface of the sea. These islands are attacked by the
rains, and in time the young mountain is brought down within reach of
the waves; in the tumult of the sea’s attack it sinks again beneath the
surface. Eventually the peak is worn down below the push and pull and
drag of even the heaviest of storm waves. Here, in the twilight of the
sea, in the calm of deep water, the mountain is secure from further
attack. Here it is likely to remain almost unchanged, perhaps throughout
the life of the earth.

Because of this virtual immortality, the oldest oceanic mountains must
be infinitely older than any of the ranges left on land. Professor Hess,
who discovered the sea mounts of the central Pacific, suggested that
these ‘drowned ancient islands’ may have been formed before the Cambrian
period, or somewhere between 500 million and i billion years ago. This
would make them perhaps of an age with the continental mountains of the
Laurentian upheaval. But the sea mounts have changed little if at all,
comparing in elevation with modern terrestrial peaks like the Jungfrau,
Mt. Etna, or Mt. Hood; while of the mountains of the Laurentian period
scarcely a trace remains. The Pacific sea mounts, according to this
theory, must have been of substantial age when the Appalachians were
thrust up, 200 million years ago; they stood almost unchanged while the
Appalachians wore down to mere wrinkles on the earth’s face. The sea
mounts were old, 60 million years ago, when the Alps and the Himalayas,
the Rockies and the Andes, rose to their majestic heights. Yet it is
probable that they will be standing unchanged in the deep sea when
these, too, shall have crumbled away to dust.

As the hidden lands beneath the sea become better known, there recurs
again and again the query: can the submerged masses of the undersea
mountains be linked with the famed ‘lost continents’? Shadowy and
insubstantial as are the accounts of all such legendary lands—the
fabled Lemuria of the Indian Ocean, St. Brendan’s Island, the lost
Atlantis—they persistently recur like some deeply rooted racial memory
in the folklore of many parts of the world.

Best known is Atlantis, which according to Plato’s account was a large
island or continent beyond the Pillars of Hercules. Atlantis was the
home of a warlike people ruled by powerful kings who made frequent
attacks upon the mainlands of Africa and Europe, brought much of Libya
under their power, roamed the Mediterranean coast of Europe, and finally
attacked Athens. However, ‘with great earthquakes and inundations, in a
single day and one fatal night, all who had been warriors [against
Greece] were swallowed up. The Island of Atlantis disappeared beneath
the sea. Since that time the sea in these quarters has become
unnavigable; vessels cannot pass there because of the sands which extend
over the site of the buried isle.’

The Atlantis legend has lived on through the centuries. As men became
bold enough to sail out on the Atlantic, to cross it, and later to
investigate its depths, they speculated about the location of the lost
land. Various Atlantic islands have been said to be the remains of a
land mass once more extensive. The lonely wave-washed Rocks of St. Paul,
perhaps more often than any other, have been identified as the remains
of Atlantis. During the past century, as the extent of the Atlantic
Ridge became better known, speculations were often centered upon this
great mass, far below the surface of the ocean.

Unfortunately for these picturesque imaginings, if the Ridge was ever
exposed, it must have been at a time long before there were men to
populate such an Atlantis. Some of the cores taken from the Ridge show a
continuous series of sediments typical of open oceans, far from land,
running back to a period some 60 million years ago. And man, even the
most primitive type, has appeared only within the past million years or
so.

Like other legends deeply rooted in folklore, the Atlantis story may
have in it an element of truth. In the shadowy beginnings of human life
on earth, primitive men here and there must have had knowledge of the
sinking of an island or a peninsula, perhaps not with the dramatic
suddenness attributed to Atlantis, but well within the time one man
could observe. The witnesses of such a happening would have described it
to their neighbors and children, and so the legend of a sinking
continent might have been born.

Such a lost land lies today beneath the waters of the North Sea. Only a
few scores of thousands of years ago, the Dogger Bank was dry land, but
now the fishermen drag their nets over this famed fishing ground,
catching cod and hake and flounders among its drowned tree trunks.

During the Pleistocene, when immense quantities of water were withdrawn
from the ocean and locked up in the glaciers, the floor of the North Sea
emerged and for a time became land. It was a low, wet land, covered with
peat bogs; then little by little the forests from the neighboring high
lands must have moved in, for there were willows and birches growing
among the mosses and ferns. Animals moved down from the mainland and
became established on this land recently won from the sea. There were
bears and wolves and hyenas, the wild ox, the bison, the woolly
rhinoceros, and the mammoth. Primitive men moved through the forests,
carrying crude stone instruments; they stalked deer and other game and
with their flints grubbed up the roots of the damp forest.

Then as the glaciers began to retreat and floods from the melting ice
poured into the sea and raised its level, this land became an island.
Probably the men escaped to the mainland before the intervening channel
had become too wide, leaving their stone implements behind. But most of
the animals remained, perforce, and little by little their island
shrank, and food became more and more scarce, but there was no escape.
Finally the sea covered the island, claiming the land and all its life.

As for the men who escaped, perhaps in their primitive way they
communicated this story to other men, who passed it down to others
through the ages, until it became fixed in the memory of the race.

None of these facts were part of recorded history until, a generation
ago, European fishermen moved out into the middle of the North Sea and
began to trawl on the Dogger. They soon made out the contours of an
irregular plateau nearly as large as Denmark, lying about 60 feet under
water, but sloping off abruptly at its edges into much deeper water.
Their trawls immediately began to bring up a great many things not found
on any ordinary fishing bank. There were loose masses of peat, which the
fishermen christened ‘moorlog.’ There were many bones, and, although the
fishermen could not identify them, they seemed to belong to large land
mammals. All of these objects damaged the nets and hindered fishing, so
whenever possible the fishermen dragged them off the bank and sent them
tumbling into deep water. But they brought back some of the bones, some
of the moorlog and fragments of trees, and the crude stone implements;
these specimens were turned over to scientists to identify. In this
strange debris of the fishing nets the scientists recognized a whole
Pleistocene fauna and flora, and the artifacts of Stone Age man. And
remembering how once the North Sea had been dry land, they reconstructed
the story of Dogger Bank, the lost island.




                          _The Long Snowfall_


                                      A DEEP AND TREMULOUS EARTH-POETRY.
                                                         —LLEWELYN POWYS

EVERY part of earth or air or sea has an atmosphere peculiarly its own,
a quality or characteristic that sets it apart from all others. When I
think of the floor of the deep sea, the single, overwhelming fact that
possesses my imagination is the accumulation of sediments. I see always
the steady, unremitting, downward drift of materials from above, flake
upon flake, layer upon layer—a drift that has continued for hundreds of
millions of years, that will go on as long as there are seas and
continents.

For the sediments are the materials of the most stupendous ‘snowfall’
the earth has ever seen. It began when the first rains fell on the
barren rocks and set in motion the forces of erosion. It was accelerated
when living creatures developed in the surface waters and the discarded
little shells of lime or silica that had encased them in life began to
drift downward to the bottom. Silently, endlessly, with the deliberation
of earth processes that can afford to be slow because they have so much
time for completion, the accumulation of the sediments has proceeded. So
little in a year, or in a human lifetime, but so enormous an amount in
the life of earth and sea.

The rains, the eroding away of the earth, the rush of sediment-laden
waters have continued, with varying pulse and tempo, throughout all of
geologic time. In addition to the silt load of every river that finds
its way to the sea, there are other materials that compose the
sediments. Volcanic dust, blown perhaps half way around the earth in the
upper atmosphere, comes eventually to rest on the ocean, drifts in the
currents, becomes waterlogged, and sinks. Sands from coastal deserts are
carried seaward on offshore winds, fall to the sea, and sink. Gravel,
pebbles, small boulders, and shells are carried by icebergs and drift
ice, to be released to the water when the ice melts. Fragments of iron,
nickel, and other meteoric debris that enter the earth’s atmosphere over
the sea—these, too, become flakes of the great snowfall. But most
widely distributed of all are the billions upon billions of tiny shells
and skeletons, the limy or silicious remains of all the minute creatures
that once lived in the upper waters.

The sediments are a sort of epic poem of the earth. When we are wise
enough, perhaps we can read in them all of past history. For all is
written here. In the nature of the materials that compose them and in
the arrangement of their successive layers the sediments reflect all
that has happened in the waters above them and on the surrounding lands.
The dramatic and the catastrophic in earth history have left their trace
in the sediments—the outpourings of volcanoes, the advance and retreat
of the ice, the searing aridity of desert lands, the sweeping
destruction of floods.

The book of the sediments has been opened only within the lifetime of
the present generation of scientists, with the most exciting progress in
collecting and deciphering samples made since 1945. Early oceanographers
could scrape up surface layers of sediment from the sea bottom with
dredges. But what was needed was an instrument, operated on the
principle of an apple corer, that could be driven vertically into the
bottom to remove a long sample or ‘core’ in which the order of the
different layers was undisturbed. Such an instrument was invented by Dr.
C. S. Piggot in 1935, and with the aid of this ‘gun’ he obtained a
series of cores across the deep Atlantic from Newfoundland to Ireland.
These cores averaged about 10 feet long. A piston core sampler,
developed by the Swedish oceanographer Kullenberg about 10 years later,
now takes undisturbed cores 70 feet long. The rate of sedimentation in
the different parts of the ocean is not definitely known, but it is very
slow; certainly such a sample represents millions of years of geologic
history.

Another ingenious method for studying the sediments has been used by
Professor W. Maurice Ewing of Columbia University and the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution. Professor Ewing found that he could measure
the thickness of the carpeting layer of sediments that overlies the rock
of the ocean floor by exploding depth charges and recording their
echoes; one echo is received from the top of the sediment layer (the
apparent bottom of the sea), another from the ‘bottom below the bottom’
or the true rock floor. The carrying and use of explosives at sea is
hazardous and cannot be attempted by all vessels, but this method was
used by the Swedish _Albatross_ as well as by the _Atlantis_ in its
exploration of the Atlantic Ridge. Ewing on the _Atlantis_ also used a
seismic refraction technique by which sound waves are made to travel
horizontally through the rock layers of the ocean floor, providing
information about the nature of the rock.

Before these techniques were developed, we could only guess at the
thickness of the sediment blanket over the floor of the sea. We might
have expected the amount to be vast, if we thought back through the ages
of gentle, unending fall—one sand grain at a time, one fragile shell
after another, here a shark’s tooth, there a meteorite fragment—but the
whole continuing persistently, relentlessly, endlessly. It is, of
course, a process similar to that which has built up the layers of rock
that help to make our mountains, for they, too, were once soft sediments
under the shallow seas that have overflowed the continents from time to
time. The sediments eventually became consolidated and cemented and, as
the seas retreated again, gave the continents their thick, covering
layers of sedimentary rocks—layers which we can see uplifted, tilted,
compressed, and broken by the vast earth movements. And we know that in
places the sedimentary rocks are many thousands of feet thick. Yet most
people felt a shock of surprise and wonder when Hans Pettersson, leader
of the Swedish Deep-Sea Expedition, announced that the _Albatross_
measurements taken in the open Atlantic basin showed sediment layers as
much as 12,000 feet thick.

If more than two miles of sediments have been deposited on the floor of
the Atlantic, an interesting question arises: has the rocky floor sagged
a corresponding distance under the terrific weight of the sediments?
Geologists hold conflicting opinions. The recently discovered Pacific
sea mounts may offer one piece of evidence that it has. If they are, as
their discoverer called them, ‘drowned ancient islands,’ then they may
have reached their present stand a mile or so below sea level through
the sinking of the ocean floor. Hess believed the islands had been
formed so long ago that coral animals had not yet evolved; otherwise the
corals would presumably have settled on the flat, planed surfaces of the
sea mounts and built them up as fast as their bases sank. In any event,
it is hard to see how they could have been worn down so far below ‘wave
base’ unless the crust of the earth sagged under its load.

One thing seems probable—the sediments have been unevenly distributed
both in place and time. In contrast to the 12,000-foot thickness found
in parts of the Atlantic, the Swedish oceanographers never found
sediments thicker than 1000 feet in the Pacific or in the Indian Ocean.
Perhaps a deep layer of lava, from ancient submarine eruptions on a
stupendous scale, underlies the upper layers of the sediments in these
places and intercepts the sound waves.

Interesting variations in the thickness of the sediment layer of the
Atlantic Ridge and the approaches to the Ridge from the American side
were reported by Ewing. As the bottom contours became less even and
began to slope up into the foothills of the Ridge, the sediments
thickened, as though piling up into mammoth drifts 1000 to 2000 feet
deep against the slopes of the hills. Farther up in the mountains of the
Ridge, where there are many level terraces from a few to a score of
miles wide, the sediments were even deeper, measuring up to 3000 feet.
But along the backbone of the Ridge, on the steep slopes and peaks and
pinnacles, the bare rock emerged, swept clean of sediments.[11]

Reflecting on these differences in thickness and distribution, our minds
return inevitably to the simile of the long snowfall. We may think of
the abyssal snowstorm in terms of a bleak and blizzard-ridden arctic
tundra. Long days of storm visit this place, when driving snow fills the
air; then a lull comes in the blizzard, and the snowfall is light. In
the snowfall of the sediments, also, there is an alternation of light
and heavy falls. The heavy falls correspond to the periods of mountain
building on the continents, when the lands are lifted high and the rain
rushes down their slopes, carrying mud and rock fragments to the sea;
the light falls mark the lulls between the mountain-building periods,
when the continents are flat and erosion is slowed. And again, on our
imaginary tundra, the winds blow the snow into deep drifts, filling in
all the valleys between the ridges, piling the snow up and up until the
contours of the land are obliterated, but scouring the ridges clear. In
the drifting sediments on the floor of the ocean we see the work of the
‘winds,’ which may be the deep ocean currents, distributing the
sediments according to laws of their own, not as yet grasped by human
minds.

We have known the general pattern of the sediment carpet, however, for a
good many years. Around the foundations of the continents, in the deep
waters off the borders of the continental slopes, are the muds of
terrestrial origin. There are muds of many colors—blue, green, red,
black, and white—apparently varying with climatic changes as well as
with the dominant soils and rocks of the lands of their origin. Farther
at sea are the oozes of predominantly marine origin—the remains of the
trillions of tiny sea creatures. Over great areas of the temperate
oceans the sea floor is largely covered with the remains of unicellular
creatures known as foraminifera, of which the most abundant genus is
Globigerina. The shells of Globigerina may be recognized in very ancient
sediments as well as in modern ones, but over the ages the species have
varied. Knowing this, we can date approximately the deposits in which
they occur. But always they have been simple animals, living in an
intricately sculptured shell of carbonate of lime, the whole so small
you would need a microscope to see its details. After the fashion of
unicellular beings, the individual Globigerina normally did not die, but
by the division of its substance became two. At each division, the old
shell was abandoned, and two new ones were formed. In warm, lime-rich
seas these tiny creatures have always multiplied prodigiously, and so,
although each is so minute, their innumerable shells blanket millions of
square miles of ocean bottom, and to a depth of thousands of feet.

In the great depths of the ocean, however, the immense pressures and the
high carbon dioxide content of deep water dissolve much of the lime long
before it reaches the bottom and return it to the great chemical
reservoir of the sea. Silica is more resistant to solution. It is one of
the curious paradoxes of the ocean that the bulk of the organic remains
that reach the great depths intact belong to unicellular creatures
seemingly of the most delicate construction. The radiolarians remind us
irresistibly of snow flakes, as infinitely varied in pattern, as lacy,
and as intricately made. Yet because their shells are fashioned of
silica instead of carbonate of lime, they can descend unchanged into the
abyssal depths. So there are broad bands of radiolarian ooze in the deep
tropical waters of the North Pacific, underlying the surface zones where
the living radiolarians occur most numerously.

Two other kinds of organic sediments are named for the creatures whose
remains compose them. Diatoms, the microscopic plant life of the sea,
flourish most abundantly in cold waters. There is a broad belt of diatom
ooze on the floor of the Antarctic Ocean, outside the zone of glacial
debris dropped by the ice pack. There is another across the North
Pacific, along the chain of great deeps that run from Alaska to Japan.
Both are zones where nutrient-laden water wells up from the depths,
sustaining a rich growth of plants. The diatoms, like the radiolarians
are encased in silicious coverings—small, boxlike cases of varied shape
and meticulously etched design.

Then, in relatively shallow parts of the open Atlantic, there are
patches of ooze composed of the remains of delicate swimming snails,
called pteropods. These winged mollusks, possessing transparent shells
of great beauty, are here and there incredibly abundant. Pteropod ooze
is the characteristic bottom deposit in the vicinity of Bermuda, and a
large patch occurs in the South Atlantic.

Mysterious and eerie are the immense areas, especially in the North
Pacific, carpeted with a soft, red sediment in which there are no
organic remains except sharks’ teeth and the ear bones of whales. This
red clay occurs at great depths. Perhaps all the materials of the other
sediments are dissolved before they can reach this zone of immense
pressures and glacial cold.

The reading of the story contained in the sediments has only begun. When
more cores are collected and examined we shall certainly decipher many
exciting chapters. Geologists have pointed out that a series of cores
from the Mediterranean might settle several controversial problems
concerning the history of the ocean and of the lands around the
Mediterranean basin. For example, somewhere in the layers of sediment
under this sea there must be evidence, in a sharply defined layer of
sand, of the time when the deserts of the Sahara were formed and the
hot, dry winds began to skim off the shifting surface layers and carry
them seaward. Long cores recently obtained in the western Mediterranean
off Algeria have given a record of volcanic activity extending back
through thousands of years, and including great prehistoric eruptions of
which we know nothing.

The Atlantic cores taken more than a decade ago by Piggot from the cable
ship _Lord Kelvin_ have been thoroughly studied by geologists. From
their analysis it is possible to look back into the past 10,000 years or
so and to sense the pulse of the earth’s climatic rhythms; for the cores
were composed of layers of cold-water Globigerina faunas (and hence
glacial stage sediments), alternating with Globigerina ooze
characteristic of warmer waters. From the clues furnished by these cores
we can visualize interglacial stages when there were periods of mild
climates, with warm water overlying the sea bottom and warmth-loving
creatures living in the ocean. Between these periods the sea grew chill.
Clouds gathered, the snows fell, and on the North American continent the
great ice sheets grew and the ice mountains moved out to the coast. The
glaciers reached the sea along a wide front; there they produced
icebergs by the thousand. The slow-moving, majestic processions of the
bergs passed out to sea, and because of the coldness of much of the
earth they penetrated farther south than any but stray bergs do today.
When finally they melted, they relinquished their loads of silt and sand
and gravel and rock fragments that had become frozen into their under
surfaces as they made their grinding way over the land. And so a layer
of glacial sediment came to overlie the normal Globigerina ooze, and the
record of an Ice Age was inscribed.

Then the sea grew warmer again, the glaciers melted and retreated, and
once more the warmer-water species of Globigerina lived in the
sea—lived and died and drifted down to build another layer of
Globigerina ooze, this time over the clays and gravels from the
glaciers. And the record of warmth and mildness was again written in the
sediments. From the Piggot cores it has been possible to reconstruct
four different periods of the advance of the ice, separated by periods
of warm climate.

It is interesting to think that even now, in our own lifetime, the
flakes of a new snowstorm are falling, falling, one by one, out there on
the ocean floor. The billions of Globigerina are drifting down, writing
their unequivocal record that this, our present world, is on the whole a
world of mild and temperate climate. Who will read their record, ten
thousand years from now?




                        _The Birth of an Island_


                                         MANY A GREEN ISLE NEEDS MUST BE
                                             IN THE DEEP, WIDE SEA . . .
                                                                —SHELLEY

MILLIONS of years ago, a volcano built a mountain on the floor of the
Atlantic. In eruption after eruption, it pushed up a great pile of
volcanic rock, until it had accumulated a mass a hundred miles across at
its base, reaching upward toward the surface of the sea. Finally its
cone emerged as an island with an area of about 200 square miles.
Thousands of years passed, and thousands of thousands. Eventually the
waves of the Atlantic cut down the cone and reduced it to a shoal—all
of it, that is, but a small fragment which remained above water. This
fragment we know as Bermuda.

With variations, the life story of Bermuda has been repeated by almost
every one of the islands that interrupt the watery expanses of the
oceans far from land. For these isolated islands in the sea are
fundamentally different from the continents. The major land masses and
the ocean basins are today much as they have been throughout the greater
part of geologic time. But islands are ephemeral, created today,
destroyed tomorrow. With few exceptions, they are the result of the
violent, explosive, earth-shaking eruptions of submarine volcanoes,
working perhaps for millions of years to achieve their end. It is one of
the paradoxes in the ways of earth and sea that a process seemingly so
destructive, so catastrophic in nature, can result in an act of
creation.

Islands have always fascinated the human mind. Perhaps it is the
instinctive response of man, the land animal, welcoming a brief
intrusion of earth in the vast, overwhelming expanse of sea. Here in a
great ocean basin, a thousand miles from the nearest continent, with
miles of water under our vessel, we come upon an island. Our
imaginations can follow its slopes down through darkening waters to
where it rests on the sea floor. We wonder why and how it arose here in
the midst of the ocean.

The birth of a volcanic island is an event marked by prolonged and
violent travail: the forces of the earth striving to create, and all the
forces of the sea opposing. The sea floor, where an island begins, is
probably nowhere more than about fifty miles thick—a thin covering over
the vast bulk of the earth. In it are deep cracks and fissures, the
results of unequal cooling and shrinkage in past ages. Along such lines
of weakness the molten lava from the earth’s interior presses up and
finally bursts forth into the sea. But a submarine volcano is different
from a terrestrial eruption, where the lava, molten rocks, gases, and
other ejecta are hurled into the air through an open crater. Here on the
bottom of the ocean the volcano has resisting it all the weight of the
ocean water above it. Despite the immense pressure of, it may be, two or
three miles of sea water, the new volcanic cone builds upward toward the
surface, in flow after flow of lava. Once within reach of the waves, its
soft ash and tuff are violently attacked, and for a long period the
potential island may remain a shoal, unable to emerge. But, eventually,
in new eruptions, the cone is pushed up into the air and a rampart
against the attacks of the waves is built of hardened lava.

Navigators’ charts are marked with numerous, recently discovered
submarine mountains. Many of these are the submerged remnants of the
islands of a geologic yesterday. The same charts show islands that
emerged from the sea at least fifty million years ago, and others that
arose within our own memory. Among the undersea mountains marked on the
charts may be the islands of tomorrow, which at this moment are forming,
unseen, on the floor of the ocean and are growing upward toward its
surface.

For the sea is by no means done with submarine eruptions; they occur
fairly commonly, sometimes detected only by instruments, sometimes
obvious to the most casual observer. Ships in volcanic zones may
suddenly find themselves in violently disturbed water. There are heavy
discharges of steam. The sea appears to bubble or boil in a furious
turbulence. Fountains spring from its surface. Floating up from the
deep, hidden places of the actual eruption come the bodies of fishes and
other deep-sea creatures, and quantities of volcanic ash and pumice.

One of the youngest of the large volcanic islands of the world is
Ascension in the South Atlantic. During the Second World War the
American airmen sang

                    _If we don’t find Ascension_
                    _Our wives will get a pension_

this island being the only piece of dry land between the hump of Brazil
and the bulge of Africa. It is a forbidding mass of cinders, in which
the vents of no less than forty extinct volcanoes can be counted. It has
not always been so barren, for its slopes have yielded the fossil
remains of trees. What happened to the forests no one knows; the first
men to explore the island, about the year 1500, found it treeless, and
today it has no natural greenness except on its highest peak, known as
Green Mountain.

In modern times we have never seen the birth of an island as large as
Ascension. But now and then there is a report of a small island
appearing where none was before. Perhaps a month, a year, five years
later, the island has disappeared into the sea again. These are the
little, stillborn islands, doomed to only a brief emergence above the
sea.

About 1830 such an island suddenly appeared in the Mediterranean between
Sicily and the coast of Africa, rising from 100-fathom depths after
there had been signs of volcanic activity in the area. It was little
more than a black cinder pile, perhaps 200 feet high. Waves, wind, and
rain attacked it. Its soft and porous materials were easily eroded; its
substance was rapidly eaten away and it sank beneath the sea. Now it is
a shoal, marked on the charts as Graham’s Reef.

Falcon Island, the tip of a volcano projecting above the Pacific nearly
two thousand miles east of Australia, suddenly disappeared in 1913.
Thirteen years later, after violent eruptions in the vicinity, it as
suddenly rose again above the surface and remained as a physical bit of
the British Empire until 1949. Then it was reported by the Colonial
Under Secretary to be missing again.

Almost from the moment of its creation, a volcanic island is foredoomed
to destruction. It has in itself the seeds of its own dissolution, for
new explosions, or landslides of the soft soil, may violently accelerate
its disintegration. Whether the destruction of an island comes quickly
or only after long ages of geologic time may also depend on external
forces: the rains that wear away the loftiest of land mountains, the
sea, and even man himself.

South Trinidad, or in the Portuguese spelling, ‘Ilha Trinidade,’ is an
example of an island that has been sculptured into bizarre forms through
centuries of weathering—an island in which the signs of dissolution are
clearly apparent. This group of volcanic peaks lies in the open
Atlantic, about a thousand miles northeast of Rio de Janeiro. E. F.
Knight wrote in 1907 that Trinidad ‘is rotten throughout, its substance
has been disintegrated by volcanic fires and by the action of water, so
that it is everywhere tumbling to pieces.’ During an interval of nine
years between Knight’s visits, a whole mountainside had collapsed in a
great landslide of broken rocks and volcanic debris.

Sometimes the disintegration takes abrupt and violent form. The greatest
explosion of historic time was the literal evisceration of the island of
Krakatoa. In 1680 there had been a premonitory eruption on this small
island in Sunda Strait, between Java and Sumatra in the Netherlands
Indies. Two hundred years later there had been a series of earthquakes.
In the spring of 1883, smoke and steam began to ascend from fissures in
the volcanic cone. The ground became noticeably warm, and warning
rumblings and hissings came from the volcano. Then, on 27 August,
Krakatoa literally exploded. In an appalling series of eruptions, that
lasted two days, the whole northern half of the cone was carried away.
The sudden inrush of ocean water added the fury of superheated steam to
the cauldron. When the inferno of white-hot lava, molten rock, steam,
and smoke had finally subsided, the island that had stood 1400 feet
above the sea had become a cavity a thousand feet below sea level. Only
along one edge of the former crater did a remnant of the island remain.

Krakatoa, in its destruction, became known to the entire world. The
eruption gave rise to a hundred-foot wave that wiped out villages along
the Strait and killed people by tens of thousands. The wave was felt on
the shores of the Indian Ocean and at Cape Horn; rounding the Cape into
the Atlantic, it sped northward and retained its identity even as far as
the English Channel. The sound of the explosions was heard in the
Philippine Islands, in Australia, and on the Island of Madagascar,
nearly 3000 miles away. And clouds of volcanic dust, the pulverized rock
that had been torn from the heart of Krakatoa, ascended into the
stratosphere and were carried around the globe to give rise to a series
of spectacular sunsets in every country of the world for nearly a year.

Although Krakatoa’s dramatic passing was the most violent eruption that
modern man has witnessed, Krakatoa itself seems to have been the product
of an even greater one. There is evidence that an immense volcano once
stood where the waters of Sunda Strait now lie. In some remote period a
titanic explosion blew it away, leaving only its base represented by a
broken ring of islands. The largest of these was Krakatoa, which, in its
own demise, carried away what was left of the original crater ring. But
in 1929 a new volcanic island arose in this place—Anak Krakatoa, Child
of Krakatoa.

Subterranean fires and deep unrest disturb the whole area occupied by
the Aleutians. The islands themselves are the peaks of a thousand-mile
chain of undersea mountains, of which volcanic action was the chief
architect. The geologic structure of the ridge is little known, but it
rises abruptly from oceanic depths of about a mile on one side and two
miles on the other. Apparently this long narrow ridge indicates a deep
fracture of the earth’s crust. On many of the islands volcanoes are now
active, or only temporarily quiescent. In the short history of modern
navigation in this region, it has often happened that a new island has
been reported but perhaps only the following year could not be found.

The small island of Bogoslof, since it was first observed in 1796, has
altered its shape and position several times and has even disappeared
completely, only to emerge again. The original island was a mass of
black rock, sculptured into fantastic, tower-like shapes. Explorers and
sealers coming upon it in the fog were reminded of a castle and named it
Castle Rock. At the present time there remain only one or two pinnacles
of the castle, a long spit of black rocks where sea lions haul out, and
a cluster of higher rocks resounding with the cries of thousands of sea
birds. Each time the parent volcano erupts, as it has done at least half
a dozen times since men have been observing it, new masses of steaming
rocks emerge from the heated waters, some to reach heights of several
hundred feet before they are destroyed in fresh explosions. Each new
cone that appears is, as described by the volcanologist Jaggar, ‘the
live crest, equivalent to a crater, of a great submarine heap of lava
six thousand feet high, piled above the floor of Bering Sea where the
Aleutian mountains fall off to the deep sea.’

One of the few exceptions to the almost universal rule that oceanic
islands have a volcanic origin seems to be the remarkable and
fascinating group of islets known as the Rocks of St. Paul. Lying in the
open Atlantic between Brazil and Africa, St. Paul’s Rocks are an
obstruction thrust up from the floor of the ocean into the midst of the
racing Equatorial Current, a mass against which the seas, which have
rolled a thousand miles unhindered, break in sudden violence. The entire
cluster of rocks covers not more than a quarter of a mile, running in a
curved line like a horseshoe. The highest rock is no more than sixty
feet above the sea; spray wets it to the summit. Abruptly the rocks dip
under water and slope steeply down into great depths. Geologists since
the time of Darwin have puzzled over the origin of these black,
wave-washed islets. Most of them agree that they are composed of
material like that of the sea floor itself. In some remote period,
inconceivable stresses in the earth’s crust must have pushed a solid
rock mass upward more than two miles.

So bare and desolate that not even a lichen grows on them, St. Paul’s
Rocks would seem one of the most unpromising places in the world to look
for a spider, spinning its web in arachnidan hope of snaring passing
insects. Yet Darwin found spiders when he visited the Rocks in 1833, and
forty years later the naturalists of H.M.S. _Challenger_ also reported
them, busy at their web-spinning. A few insects are there, too, some as
parasites on the sea birds, three species of which nest on the Rocks.
One of the insects is a small brown moth that lives on feathers. This
very nearly completes the inventory of the inhabitants of St. Paul’s
Rocks, except for the grotesque crabs that swarm over the islets, living
chiefly on the flying fish brought by the birds to their young.

St. Paul’s Rocks are not alone in having an extraordinary assortment of
inhabitants, for the faunas and floras of oceanic islands are amazingly
different from those of the continents. The pattern of island life is
peculiar and significant. Aside from forms recently introduced by man,
islands remote from the continents are never inhabited by any land
mammals, except sometimes the one mammal that has learned to fly—the
bat. There are never any frogs, salamanders, or other amphibians. Of
reptiles, there may be a few snakes, lizards, and turtles, but the more
remote the island from a major land mass, the fewer reptiles there are,
and the really isolated islands have none. There are usually a few
species of land birds, some insects, and some spiders. So remote an
island as Tristan da Cunha in the South Atlantic, 1500 miles from the
nearest continent, has no land animals but these: three species of land
birds, a few insects, and several small snails.

With so selective a list, it is hard to see how, as some biologists
believe, the islands could have been colonized by migration across land
bridges, even if there were good evidence for the existence of the
bridges. The very animals missing from the islands are the ones that
would have had to come dry-shod, over the hypothetical bridges. The
plants and animals that we find on oceanic islands, on the other hand,
are the ones that could have come by wind or water. As an alternative,
then, we must suppose that the stocking of the islands has been
accomplished by the strangest migration in earth’s history—a migration
that began long before man appeared on earth and is still continuing, a
migration that seems more like a series of cosmic accidents than an
orderly process of nature.

We can only guess how long after its emergence from the sea an oceanic
island may lie uninhabited. Certainly in its original state it is a land
bare, harsh, and repelling beyond human experience. No living thing
moves over the slopes of its volcanic hills; no plants cover its naked
lava fields. But little by little, riding on the winds, drifting on the
currents, or rafting in on logs, floating brush, or trees, the plants
and animals that are to colonize it arrive from the distant continents.

So deliberate, so unhurried, so inexorable are the ways of nature that
the stocking of an island may require thousands or millions of years. It
may be that no more than half a dozen times in all these eons does a
particular form, such as a tortoise, make a successful landing upon its
shores. To wonder impatiently why man is not a constant witness of such
arrivals is to fail to understand the majestic pace of the process.

Yet we have occasional glimpses of the method. Natural rafts of uprooted
trees and matted vegetation have frequently been seen adrift at sea,
more than a thousand miles off the mouths of such great tropical rivers
as the Congo, the Ganges, the Amazon, and the Orinoco. Such rafts could
easily carry an assortment of insect, reptile, or mollusk passengers.
Some of the involuntary passengers might be able to withstand long weeks
at sea; others would die during the first stages of the journey.
Probably the ones best adapted for travel by raft are the wood-boring
insects, which, of all the insect tribe, are most commonly found on
oceanic islands. The poorest raft travelers must be the mammals. But
even a mammal might cover short interisland distances. A few days after
the explosion of Krakatoa, a small monkey was rescued from some drifting
timber in Sunda Strait. She had been terribly burned, but survived the
experience.

No less than the water, the winds and the air currents play their part
in bringing inhabitants to the islands. The upper atmosphere, even
during the ages before man entered it in his machines, was a place of
congested traffic. Thousands of feet above the earth, the air is crowded
with living creatures, drifting, flying, gliding, ballooning, or
involuntarily swirling along on the high winds. Discovery of this rich
aerial plankton had to wait until man himself had found means to make
physical invasion of these regions. With special nets and traps,
scientists have now collected from the upper atmosphere many of the
forms that inhabit oceanic islands. Spiders, whose almost invariable
presence on these islands is a fascinating problem, have been captured
nearly three miles above the earth’s surface. Airmen have passed through
great numbers of the white, silken filaments of spiders’ ‘parachutes’ at
heights of two to three miles. At altitudes of 6000 to 16,000 feet, and
with wind velocities reaching 45 miles an hour, many living insects have
been taken. At such heights and on such strong winds, they might well
have been carried hundreds of miles. Seeds have been collected at
altitudes up to 5000 feet. Among those commonly taken are members of the
Composite family, especially the so-called ‘thistle-down’ typical of
oceanic islands.

An interesting point about transport of living plants and animals by
wind is the fact that in the upper layers of the earth’s atmosphere the
winds do not necessarily blow in the same direction as at the earth’s
surface. The trade winds are notably shallow, so that a man standing on
the cliffs of St. Helena, a thousand feet above the sea, is above the
wind, which blows with great force below him. Once drawn into the upper
air, insects, seeds, and the like can easily be carried in a direction
contrary to that of the winds prevailing at island level.

The wide-ranging birds that visit islands of the ocean in migration may
also have a good deal to do with the distribution of plants, and perhaps
even of some insects and minute land shells. From a ball of mud taken
from a bird’s plumage, Charles Darwin raised eighty-two separate plants,
belonging to five distinct species! Many plant seeds have hooks or
prickles, ideal for attachment to feathers. Such birds as the Pacific
golden plover, which annually flies from the mainland of Alaska to the
Hawaiian Islands and even beyond, probably figure in many riddles of
plant distribution.

The catastrophe of Krakatoa gave naturalists a perfect opportunity to
observe the colonization of an island. With most of the island itself
destroyed, and the remnant covered with a deep layer of lava and ash
that remained hot for weeks, Krakatoa after the explosive eruptions of
1883 was, from a biological standpoint, a new volcanic island. As soon
as it was possible to visit it, scientists searched for signs of life,
although it was hard to imagine how any living thing could have
survived. Not a single plant or animal could be found. It was not until
nine months after the eruption that the naturalist Cotteau was able to
report: ‘I only discovered one microscopic spider—only one. This
strange pioneer of the renovation was busy spinning its web.’ Since
there were no insects on the island, the web-spinning of the bold little
spider was presumably in vain, and except for a few blades of grass,
practically nothing lived on Krakatoa for a quarter of a century. Then
the colonists began to arrive—a few mammals in 1908; a number of birds,
lizards, and snakes; various mollusks, insects, and earthworms. Ninety
per cent of Krakatoa’s new inhabitants, Dutch scientists found, were
forms that could have arrived by air.

Isolated from the great mass of life on the continents, with no
opportunity for the crossbreeding that tends to preserve the average and
to eliminate the new and unusual, island life has developed in a
remarkable manner. On these remote bits of earth, nature has excelled in
the creation of strange and wonderful forms. As though to prove her
incredible versatility, almost every island has developed species that
are endemic—that is, they are peculiar to it alone and are duplicated
nowhere else on earth.

It was from the pages of earth’s history written on the lava fields of
the Galapagos that young Charles Darwin got his first inkling of the
great truths of the origin of species. Observing the strange plants and
animals—giant tortoises, black, amazing lizards that hunted their food
in the surf, sea lions, birds in extraordinary variety—Darwin was
struck by their vague similarity to mainland species of South and
Central America, yet was haunted by the differences, differences that
distinguish them not only from the mainland species but from those on
other islands of the archipelago. Years later he was to write in
reminiscence: ‘Both in space and time, we seem to be brought somewhat
near to that great fact—that mystery of mysteries—the first appearance
of new beings on earth.’

Of the ‘new beings’ evolved on islands, some of the most striking
examples have been birds. In some remote age before there were men, a
small, pigeonlike bird found its way to the island of Mauritius, in the
Indian Ocean. By processes of change at which we can only guess, this
bird lost the power of flight, developed short, stout legs, and grew
larger until it reached the size of a modern turkey. Such was the origin
of the fabulous dodo, which did not long survive the advent of man on
Mauritius. New Zealand was the sole home of the moas. One species of
these ostrich-like birds stood twelve feet high. Moas had roamed New
Zealand from the early part of the Tertiary; those that remained when
the Maoris arrived soon died out.

Other island forms besides the dodo and the moas have tended to become
large. Perhaps the Galapagos tortoise became a giant after its arrival
on the islands, although fossil remains on the continents cast doubt on
this. The loss of wing use and even of the wings themselves (the moas
had none) are common results of insular life. Insects on small,
wind-swept islands tend to lose the power of flight—those that retain
it are in danger of being blown out to sea. The Galapagos Islands have a
flightless cormorant. There have been at least fourteen species of
flightless rails on the islands of the Pacific alone.

One of the most interesting and engaging characteristics of island
species is their extraordinary tameness—a lack of sophistication in
dealings with the human race, which even the bitter teachings of
experience do not quickly alter. When Robert Cushman Murphy visited the
island of South Trinidad in 1913 with a party from the brig _Daisy_,
terns alighted on the heads of the men in the whaleboat and peered
inquiringly into their faces. Albatrosses on Laysan, whose habits
include wonderful ceremonial dances, allowed naturalists to walk among
their colonies and responded with a grave bow to similar polite
greetings from the visitors. When the British ornithologist David Lack
visited the Galapagos Islands, a century after Darwin, he found that the
hawks allowed themselves to be touched, and the flycatchers tried to
remove hair from the heads of the men for nesting material. ‘It is a
curious pleasure,’ he wrote, ‘to have the birds of the wilderness
settling upon one’s shoulders, and the pleasure could be much less rare
were man less destructive.’

But man, unhappily, has written one of his blackest records as a
destroyer on the oceanic islands. He has seldom set foot on an island
that he has not brought about disastrous changes. He has destroyed
environments by cutting, clearing, and burning; he has brought with him
as a chance associate the nefarious rat; and almost invariably he has
turned loose upon the islands a whole Noah’s Ark of goats, hogs, cattle,
dogs, cats, and other non-native animals as well as plants. Upon species
after species of island life, the black night of extinction has fallen.

In all the world of living things, it is doubtful whether there is a
more delicately balanced relationship than that of island life to its
environment. This environment is a remarkably uniform one. In the midst
of a great ocean, ruled by currents and winds that rarely shift their
course, climate changes little. There are few natural enemies, perhaps
none at all. The harsh struggle for existence that is the normal lot of
continental life is softened on the islands. When this gentle pattern of
life is abruptly changed, the island creatures have little ability to
make the adjustments necessary for survival.

Ernst Mayr tells of a steamer wrecked off Lord Howe Island east of
Australia in 1918. Its rats swam ashore. In two years they had so nearly
exterminated the native birds that an islander wrote, ‘This paradise of
birds has become a wilderness, and the quietness of death reigns where
all was melody.’

On Tristan da Cunha almost all of the unique land birds that had evolved
there in the course of the ages were exterminated by hogs and rats. The
native fauna of the island of Tahiti is losing ground against the horde
of alien species that man has introduced. The Hawaiian Islands, which
have lost their native plants and animals faster than almost any other
area in the world, are a classic example of the results of interfering
with natural balances. Certain relations of animal to plant, and of
plant to soil, had grown up through the centuries. When man came in and
rudely disturbed this balance, he set off a whole series of chain
reactions.

Vancouver brought cattle and goats to the Hawaiian Islands, and the
resulting damage to forests and other vegetation was enormous. Many
plant introductions were as bad. A plant known as the pamakani was
brought in many years ago, according to report, by a Captain Makee for
his beautiful gardens on the island of Maui. The pamakani, which has
light, wind-borne seeds, quickly escaped from the captain’s gardens,
ruined the pasture lands on Maui, and proceeded to hop from island to
island. The CCC boys were at one time put to work to clear it out of the
Honouliuli Forest Reserve, but as fast as they destroyed it, the seeds
of new plants arrived on the wind. Lantana was another plant brought in
as an ornamental species. Now it covers thousands of acres with a
thorny, scrambling growth—despite large sums of money spent to import
parasitic insects to control it.

There was once a society in Hawaii for the special purpose of
introducing exotic birds. Today when you go to the islands, you see,
instead of the exquisite native birds that greeted Captain Cook, mynas
from India, cardinals from the United States or Brazil, doves from Asia,
weavers from Australia, skylarks from Europe, and titmice from Japan.
Most of the original bird life has been wiped out, and to find its
fugitive remnants you would have to search assiduously in the most
remote hills.

Some of the island species have, at best, the most tenuous hold on life.
The Laysan teal is found nowhere in the world but on the one small
island of Laysan. Even on this island it occurs only on one end, where
there is a seepage of fresh water. Probably the total population of this
species does not exceed fifty individuals. Destruction of the small
swampy bit of land that is its home, or the introduction of a hostile or
competing species, could easily snap the slender thread of life.

Most of man’s habitual tampering with nature’s balance by introducing
exotic species has been done in ignorance of the fatal chain of events
that would follow. But in modern times, at least, we might profit by
history. About the year 1513, the Portuguese introduced goats onto the
recently discovered island of St. Helena, which had developed a
magnificent forest of gumwood, ebony, and brazilwood. By 1560 or
thereabouts, the goats had so multiplied that they wandered over the
island by the thousand, in flocks a mile long. They trampled the young
trees and ate the seedlings. By this time the colonists had begun to cut
and burn the forests, so that it is hard to say whether men or goats
were the more responsible for the destruction. But of the result there
was no doubt. By the early 1800’s the forests were gone, and the
naturalist Alfred Wallace later described this once beautiful,
forest-clad volcanic island as a ‘rocky desert,’ in which the remnants
of the original flora persisted only in the most inaccessible peaks and
crater ridges.

When the astronomer Halley visited the islands of the Atlantic about
1700, he put a few goats ashore on South Trinidad. This time, without
the further aid of man, the work of deforestation proceeded so rapidly
that it was nearly completed within the century. Today Trinidad’s slopes
are the place of a ghost forest, strewn with the fallen and decaying
trunks of long-dead trees; its soft volcanic soils, no longer held by
the interlacing roots, are sliding away into the sea.

One of the most interesting of the Pacific islands was Laysan, a tiny
scrap of soil which is a far outrider of the Hawaiian chain. It once
supported a forest of sandalwood and fanleaf palms and had five land
birds, all peculiar to Laysan alone. One of them was the Laysan rail, a
charming, gnomelike creature no more than six inches high, with wings
that seemed too small (and were never used as wings), and feet that
seemed too large, and a voice like distant, tinkling bells. About 1887,
the captain of a visiting ship moved some of the rails to Midway, about
300 miles to the west, establishing a second colony. It seemed a
fortunate move, for soon thereafter rabbits were introduced on Laysan.
Within a quarter of a century, the rabbits had killed off the vegetation
of the tiny island, reduced it to a sandy desert, and all but
exterminated themselves. As for the rails, the devastation of their
island was fatal, and the last rail died about 1924.

Perhaps the Laysan colony could later have been restored from the Midway
group had not tragedy struck there also. During the war in the Pacific,
rats went ashore to island after island from ships and landing craft.
They invaded Midway in 1943. The adult rails were slaughtered. The eggs
were eaten, and the young birds killed. The world’s last Laysan rail was
seen in 1944.

The tragedy of the oceanic islands lies in the uniqueness, the
irreplaceability of the species they have developed by the slow
processes of the ages. In a reasonable world men would have treated
these islands as precious possessions, as natural museums filled with
beautiful and curious works of creation, valuable beyond price because
nowhere in the world are they duplicated. W. H. Hudson’s lament for the
birds of the Argentine pampas might even more truly have been spoken of
the islands: ‘The beautiful has vanished and returns not.’




                      _The Shape of Ancient Seas_


                     TILL THE SLOW SEA RISE AND THE SHEER CLIFF CRUMBLE,
                           TILL TERRACE AND MEADOW THE DEEP GULFS DRINK.
                                                              —SWINBURNE

WE live in an age of rising seas. Along all the coasts of the United
States a continuing rise of sea level has been perceptible on the tide
gauges of the Coast and Geodetic Survey since 1930. For the
thousand-mile stretch from Massachusetts to Florida, and on the coast of
the Gulf of Mexico, the rise amounted to about a third of a foot between
1930 and 1948. The water is also rising (but more slowly) along the
Pacific shores. These records of the tide gauges do not include the
transient advances and retreats of the water caused by winds and storms,
but signify a steady, continuing advance of the sea upon the land.

This evidence of a rising sea is an interesting and even an exciting
thing because it is rare that, in the short span of human life, we can
actually observe and measure the progress of one of the great earth
rhythms. What is happening is nothing new. Over the long span of
geologic time, the ocean waters have come in over North America many
times and have again retreated into their basins. For the boundary
between sea and land is the most fleeting and transitory feature of the
earth, and the sea is forever repeating its encroachments upon the
continents. It rises and falls like a great tide, sometimes engulfing
half a continent in its flood, reluctant in its ebb, moving in a rhythm
mysterious and infinitely deliberate.

Now once again the ocean is overfull. It is spilling over the rims of
its basins. It fills the shallow seas that border the continents, like
the Barents, Bering, and China seas. Here and there it has advanced into
the interior and lies in such inland seas as Hudson Bay, the St.
Lawrence embayment, the Baltic, and the Sunda Sea. On the Atlantic coast
of the United States the mouths of many rivers, like the Hudson and the
Susquehanna, have been drowned by the advancing flood; the old,
submerged channels are hidden under bays like the Chesapeake and the
Delaware.

The advance noted so clearly on the tide gauges may be part of a long
rise that began thousands of years ago—perhaps when the glaciers of the
most recent Ice Age began to melt. But it is only within recent decades
that there have been instruments to measure it in any part of the world.
Even now the gauges are few and scattered, considering the world as a
whole. Because of the scarcity of world records, it is not known whether
the rise observed in the United States since 1930 is being duplicated on
all other continents.

Where and when the ocean will halt its present advance and begin again
its slow retreat into its basin, no one can say. If the rise over the
continent of North America should amount to a hundred feet (and there is
more than enough water now frozen in land ice to provide such a rise)
most of the Atlantic seaboard, with its cities and towns, would be
submerged. The surf would break against the foothills of the
Appalachians. The coastal plain of the Gulf of Mexico would lie under
water; the lower part of the Mississippi Valley would be submerged.

If, however, the rise should be as much as 600 feet, large areas in the
eastern half of the continent would disappear under the waters. The
Appalachians would become a chain of mountainous islands. The Gulf of
Mexico would creep north, finally meeting in mid-continent with the
flood that had entered from the Atlantic into the Great Lakes, through
the valley of the St. Lawrence. Much of northern Canada would be covered
by water from the Arctic Ocean and Hudson Bay.

All of this would seem to us extraordinary and catastrophic, but the
truth is that North America and most other continents have known even
more extensive invasions by the sea than the one we have just imagined.
Probably the greatest submergence in the history of the earth took place
in the Cretaceous period, about 100 million years ago. Then the ocean
waters advanced upon North America from the north, south, and east,
finally forming an inland sea about 1000 miles wide that extended from
the Arctic to the Gulf of Mexico, and then spread eastward to cover the
coastal plain from the Gulf to New Jersey. At the height of the
Cretaceous flood about half of North America was submerged. All over the
world the seas rose. They covered most of the British Isles, except for
scattered outcroppings of ancient rocks. In southern Europe only the
old, rocky highlands stood above the sea, which intruded in long bays
and gulfs even into the central highlands of the continent. The ocean
moved into Africa and laid down deposits of sandstones; later weathering
of these rocks provided the desert sands of the Sahara. From a drowned
Sweden, an inland sea flowed across Russia, covered the Caspian Sea, and
extended to the Himalayas. Parts of India were submerged, and of
Australia, Japan, and Siberia. On the South American continent, the area
where later the Andes were to rise was covered by sea.

With variations of extent and detail, these events have been repeated
again and again. The very ancient Ordovician seas, some 400 million
years ago, submerged more than half of North America, leaving only a few
large islands marking the borderlands of the continent, and a scattering
of smaller ones rising out of the inland sea. The marine transgressions
of Devonian and Silurian time were almost as extensive. But each time
the pattern of invasion was a little different, and it is doubtful that
there is any part of the continent that at some time has not lain at the
bottom of one of these shallow seas.

You do not have to travel to find the sea, for the traces of its ancient
stands are everywhere about. Though you may be a thousand miles inland,
you can easily find reminders that will reconstruct for the eye and ear
of the mind the processions of its ghostly waves and the roar of its
surf, far back in time. So, on a mountain top in Pennsylvania, I have
sat on rocks of whitened limestone, fashioned of the shells of billions
upon billions of minute sea creatures. Once they had lived and died in
an arm of the ocean that overlay this place, and their limy remains had
settled to the bottom. There, after eons of time, they had become
compacted into rock and the sea had receded; after yet more eons the
rock had been uplifted by bucklings of the earth’s crust and now it
formed the backbone of a long mountain range.

Far in the interior of the Florida Everglades I have wondered at the
feeling of the sea that came to me—wondered until I realized that here
were the same flatness, the same immense spaces, the same dominance of
the sky and its moving, changing clouds; wondered until I remembered
that the hard rocky floor on which I stood, its flatness interrupted by
upthrust masses of jagged coral rock, had been only recently constructed
by the busy architects of the coral reefs under a warm sea. Now the rock
is thinly covered with grass and water; but everywhere is the feeling
that the land has formed only the thinnest veneer over the underlying
platform of the sea, that at any moment the process might be reversed
and the sea reclaim its own.

So in all lands we may sense the former presence of the sea. There are
outcroppings of marine limestone in the Himalayas, now at an elevation
of 20,000 feet. These rocks are reminders of a warm, clear sea that lay
over southern Europe and northern Africa and extended into southwestern
Asia. This was some 50 million years ago. Immense numbers of a large
protozoan known as nummulites swarmed in this sea and each, in death,
contributed to the building of a thick layer of nummulitic limestone.
Eons later, the ancient Egyptians were to carve their Sphinx from a mass
of this rock; other deposits of the same stone they quarried to obtain
material to build their pyramids.

The famous white cliffs of Dover are composed of chalk deposited by the
seas of the Cretaceous period, during that great inundation we have
spoken of. The chalk extends from Ireland through Denmark and Germany,
and forms its thickest beds in south Russia. It consists of shells of
those minute sea creatures called foraminifera, the shells being
cemented together with a fine-textured deposit of calcium carbonate. In
contrast to the foraminiferal ooze that covers large areas of ocean
bottom at moderate depths, the chalk seems to be a shallow-water
deposit, but it is so pure in texture that the surrounding lands must
have been low deserts, from which little material was carried seaward.
Grains of wind-borne quartz sand, which frequently occur in the chalk,
support this view. At certain levels the chalk contains nodules of
flint. Stone Age men mined the flint for weapons and tools and also used
this relic of the Cretaceous sea to light their fires.

Many of the natural wonders of the earth owe their existence to the fact
that once the sea crept over the land, laid down its deposits of
sediments, and then withdrew. There is Mammoth Cave in Kentucky, for
example, where one may wander through miles of underground passages and
enter rooms with ceilings 250 feet overhead. Caves and passageways have
been dissolved by ground water out of an immense thickness of limestone,
deposited by a Paleozoic sea. In the same way, the story of Niagara
Falls goes back to Silurian time, when a vast embayment of the Arctic
Sea crept southward over the continent. Its waters were clear, for the
borderlands were low and little sediment or silt was carried into the
inland sea. It deposited large beds of the hard rock called dolomite,
and in time they formed a long escarpment near the present border
between Canada and the United States. Millions of years later, floods of
water released from melting glaciers poured over this cliff, cutting
away the soft shales that underlay the dolomite, and causing mass after
mass of the undercut rock to break away. In this fashion Niagara Falls
and its gorge were created.

Some of these inland seas were immense and important features of their
world, although all of them were shallow compared with the central basin
where, since earliest time, the bulk of the ocean waters have resided.
Some may have been as much as 600 feet deep, about the same as the
depths over the outer edge of the continental shelf. No one knows the
pattern of their currents, but often they must have carried the warmth
of the tropics into far northern lands. During the Cretaceous period,
for example, breadfruit, cinnamon, laurel, and fig trees grew in
Greenland. When the continents were reduced to groups of islands there
must have been few places that possessed a continental type of climate
with its harsh extremes of heat and cold; mild oceanic climates must
rather have been the rule.

Geologists say that each of the grander divisions of earth history
consists of three phases: in the first the continents are high, erosion
is active, and the seas are largely confined to their basins; in the
second the continents are lowest and the seas have invaded them broadly;
in the third the continents have begun once more to rise. According to
the late Charles Schuchert, who devoted much of his distinguished career
as a geologist to mapping the ancient seas and lands: ‘Today we are
living in the beginning of a new cycle, when the continents are largest,
highest, and scenically grandest. The oceans, however, have begun
another invasion upon North America.’

What brings the ocean out of its deep basins, where it has been
contained for eons of time, to invade the lands? Probably there has
always been not one alone, but a combination of causes.

The mobility of the earth’s crust is inseparably linked with the
changing relations of sea and land—the warping upward or downward of
that surprisingly plastic substance which forms the outer covering of
our earth. The crustal movements affect both land and sea bottom but are
most marked near the continental margins. They may involve one or both
shores of an ocean, one or all coasts of a continent. They proceed in a
slow and mysterious cycle, one phase of which may require millions of
years for its completion. Each downward movement of the continental
crust is accompanied by a slow flooding of the land by the sea, each
upward buckling by the retreat of the water.

But the movements of the earth’s crust are not alone responsible for the
invading seas. There are other important causes. Certainly one of them
is the displacement of ocean water by land sediments. Every grain of
sand or silt carried out by the rivers and deposited at sea displaces a
corresponding amount of water. Disintegration of the land and the
seaward freighting of its substance have gone on without interruption
since the beginning of geologic time. It might be thought that the sea
level would have been rising continuously, but the matter is not so
simple. As they lose substance the continents tend to rise higher, like
a ship relieved of part of its cargo. The ocean floor, to which the
sediments are transferred, sags under its load. The exact combination of
all these conditions that will result in a rising ocean level is a very
complex matter, not easily recognized or predicted.

Then there is the growth of the great submarine volcanoes, which build
up immense lava cones on the floor of the ocean. Some geologists believe
these may have an important effect on the changing level of the sea. The
bulk of some of these volcanoes is impressive. Bermuda is one of the
smallest, but its volume beneath the surface is about 2500 cubic miles.
The Hawaiian chain of volcanic islands extends for nearly 2000 miles
across the Pacific and contains several islands of great size; its total
displacement of water must be tremendous. Perhaps it is more than
coincidence that this chain arose in Cretaceous time, when the greatest
flood the world has ever seen advanced upon the continents.

For the past million years, all other causes of marine transgressions
have been dwarfed by the dominating role of the glaciers. The
Pleistocene period was marked by alternating advances and retreats of a
great ice sheet. Four times the ice caps formed and grew deep over the
land, pressing southward into the valleys and over the plains. And four
times the ice melted and shrank and withdrew from the lands it had
covered. We live now in the last stages of this fourth withdrawal. About
half the ice formed in the last Pleistocene glaciation remains in the
ice caps of Greenland and Antarctica and the scattered glaciers of
certain mountains.

Each time the ice sheet thickened and expanded with the unmelted snows
of winter after winter, its growth meant a corresponding lowering of the
ocean level. For directly or indirectly, the moisture that falls on the
earth’s surface as rain or snow has been withdrawn from the reservoir of
the sea. Ordinarily, the withdrawal is a temporary one, the water being
returned via the normal run-off of rain and melting snow. But in the
glacial period the summers were cool, and the snows of any winter did
not melt entirely but were carried over to the succeeding winter, when
the new snows found and covered them. So little by little the level of
the sea dropped as the glaciers robbed it of its water, and at the
climax of each of the major glaciations the ocean all over the world
stood at a very low level.

Today, if you look in the right places, you will see the evidences of
some of these old stands of the sea. Of course the strand marks left by
the extreme low levels are now deeply covered by water and may be
discovered only indirectly by sounding. But where, in past ages, the
water level stood higher than it does today you can find its traces. In
Samoa, at the foot of a cliff wall now 15 feet above the present level
of the sea, you can find benches cut in the rocks by waves. You will
find the same thing on other Pacific islands, and on St. Helena in the
South Atlantic, on islands of the Indian Ocean, in the West Indies, and
around the Cape of Good Hope.

Sea caves in cliffs now high above the battering assault and the flung
spray of the waves that cut them are eloquent of the changed relation of
sea and land. You will find such caves widely scattered over the world.
On the west coast of Norway there is a remarkable, wave-cut tunnel. Out
of the hard granite of the island of Torghattan, the pounding surf of a
flooding interglacial sea cut a passageway through the island, a
distance of about 530 feet, and in so doing removed nearly 5 million
cubic feet of rock. The tunnel now stands 400 feet above the sea. Its
elevation is due in part to the elastic, upward rebound of the crust
after the melting of the ice.

During the other half of the cycle, when the seas sank lower and lower
as the glaciers grew in thickness, the world’s shorelines were
undergoing changes even more far-reaching and dramatic. Every river felt
the effect of the lowering sea; its waters were speeded in their course
to the ocean and given new strength for the deepening and cutting of its
channel. Following the downward-moving shorelines, the rivers extended
their courses over the drying sands and muds of what only recently had
been the sloping sea bottom. Here the rushing torrents—swollen with
melting glacier water—picked up great quantities of loose mud and sand
and rolled into the sea as a turgid flood.

During one or more of the Pleistocene lowerings of sea level, the floor
of the North Sea was drained of its water and for a time became dry
land. The rivers of northern Europe and of the British Isles followed
the retreating waters seaward. Eventually the Rhine captured the whole
drainage system of the Thames. The Elbe and the Weser became one river.
The Seine rolled through what is now the English Channel and cut itself
a trough out across the continental shelf—perhaps the same drowned
channel now discernible by soundings beyond Lands End.

The greatest of all Pleistocene glaciations came rather late in the
period—probably only about 200 thousand years ago, and well within the
time of man. The tremendous lowering of sea level must have affected the
life of Paleolithic man. Certainly he was able, at more than one period,
to walk across a wide bridge at Bering Strait, which became dry land
when the level of the ocean dropped below this shallow shelf. There were
other land bridges, created in the same way. As the ocean receded from
the coast of India, a long submarine bank became a shoal, then finally
emerged, and primitive man walked across ‘Adam’s Bridge’ to the island
of Ceylon.

Many of the settlements of ancient man must have been located on the
seacoast or near the great deltas of the rivers, and relics of his
civilization may lie in caves long since covered by the rising ocean.
Our meager knowledge of Paleolithic man might be increased by searching
along these old drowned shorelines. One archaeologist has recommended
searching shallow portions of the Adriatic Sea, with ‘submarine boats
casting strong electric lights’ or even with glass-bottomed boats and
artificial light in the hope of discovering the outlines of shell
heaps—the kitchen middens of the early men who once lived here.
Professor R. A. Daly has pointed out:

    The last Glacial stage was the Reindeer Age of French history.
    Men then lived in the famous caves overlooking the channels of
    the French rivers, and hunted the reindeer which throve on the
    cool plains of France south of the ice border. The Late-Glacial
    rise of general sea level was necessarily accompanied by a rise
    of the river waters downstream. Hence the lowest caves are
    likely to have been partly or wholly drowned . . . There the
    search for more relics of Paleolithic man should be pursued.[F]

[F] From _The Changing World of the Ice Age_, 1934 edition, Yale
University Press, p. 210.

-----

Some of our Stone Age ancestors must have known the rigors of life near
the glaciers. While men as well as plants and animals moved southward
before the ice, some must have remained within sight and sound of the
great frozen wall. To these the world was a place of storm and blizzard,
with bitter winds roaring down out of the blue mountain of ice that
dominated the horizon and reached upward into gray skies, all filled
with the roaring tumult of the advancing glacier, and with the thunder
of moving tons of ice breaking away and plunging into the sea.

But those who lived half the earth away, on some sunny coast of the
Indian Ocean, walked and hunted on dry land over which the sea, only
recently, had rolled deeply. These men knew nothing of the distant
glaciers, nor did they understand that they walked and hunted where they
did because quantities of ocean water were frozen as ice and snow in a
distant land.

In any imaginative reconstruction of the world of the Ice Age, we are
plagued by one tantalizing uncertainty: how low did the ocean level fall
during the period of greatest spread of the glaciers, when unknown
quantities of water were frozen in the ice? Was it only a moderate fall
of 200 or 300 feet—a change paralleled many times in geologic history
in the ebb and flow of the epicontinental seas? Or was it a dramatic
drawing down of the ocean by 2000, even 3000 feet?

Each of these various levels has been suggested as an actual possibility
by one or more geologists. Perhaps it is not surprising that there
should be such radical disagreement. It has been only about a century
since Louis Agassiz gave the world its first understanding of the moving
mountains of ice and their dominating effect on the Pleistocene world.
Since then, men in all parts of the earth have been patiently
accumulating the facts and reconstructing the events of those four
successive advances and retreats of the ice. Only the present generation
of scientists, led by such daring thinkers as Daly, have understood that
each thickening of the ice sheets meant a corresponding lowering of the
ocean, and that with each retreat of the melting ice a returning flood
of water raised the sea level.

Of this ‘alternate robbery and restitution’ most geologists have taken a
conservative view and said that the greatest lowering of the sea level
could not have amounted to more than 400 feet, possibly only half as
much. Most of those who argue that the drawing down was much greater
base their reasoning upon the submarine canyons, those deep gorges cut
in the continental slopes. The deeper canyons lie a mile or more below
the present level of the sea. Geologists who maintain that at least the
upper parts of the canyons were stream-cut say that the sea level must
have fallen enough to permit this during the Pleistocene glaciation.

This question of the farthest retreat of the sea into its basins must
await further searchings into the mysteries of the ocean. We seem on the
verge of exciting new discoveries. Now oceanographers and geologists
have better instruments than ever before to probe the depths of the sea,
to sample its rocks and deeply layered sediments, and to read with
greater clarity the dim pages of past history.

Meanwhile, the sea ebbs and flows in these grander tides of earth, whose
stages are measurable not in hours but in millennia—tides so vast they
are invisible and uncomprehended by the senses of man. Their ultimate
cause, should it ever be discovered, may be found to be deep within the
fiery center of the earth, or it may lie somewhere in the dark spaces of
the universe.




                                       II


                                      THE
                                  RESTLES
                                        S
                                      SEA






                            _Wind and Water_


                                    THE WIND’S FEET SHINE ALONG THE SEA.
                                                              —SWINBURNE

AS the waves roll in toward Lands End on the westernmost tip of England
they bring the feel of the distant places of the Atlantic. Moving
shoreward above the steeply rising floor of the deep sea, from dark blue
water into troubled green, they pass the edge of ‘soundings’ and roll up
over the continental shelf in confused ripplings and turbulence. Over
the shoaling bottom they sweep landward, breaking on the Seven Stones of
the channel between the Scilly Isles and Lands End, coming in over the
sunken ledges and the rocks that roll out their glistening backs at low
water. As they approach the rocky tip of Lands End, they pass over a
strange instrument lying on the sea bottom. By the fluctuating pressure
of their rise and fall they tell this instrument many things of the
distant Atlantic waters from which they have come, and their messages
are translated by its mechanisms into symbols understandable to the
human mind.

If you visited this place and talked to the meteorologist in charge, he
could tell you the life histories of the waves that are rolling in,
minute by minute and hour after hour, bringing their messages of far-off
places. He could tell you where the waves were created by the action of
wind on water, the strength of the winds that produced them, how fast
the storm is moving, and how soon, if at all, it will become necessary
to raise storm warnings along the coast of England. Most of the waves
that roll over the recorder at Lands End, he would tell you, are born in
the stormy North Atlantic eastward from Newfoundland and south of
Greenland. Some can be traced to tropical storms on the opposite side of
the Atlantic, moving through the West Indies and along the coast of
Florida. A few have rolled up from the southernmost part of the world,
taking a great-circle course all the way from Cape Horn to Lands End, a
journey of 6000 miles.

On the coast of California wave recorders have detected swell from as
great a distance, for some of the surf that breaks on that coast in
summer is born in the west-wind belt of the Southern Hemisphere. The
Cornwall recorders and those in California, as well as a few on the east
coast of America, have been in use since the end of the Second World
War. These experiments have several objects, among them the development
of a new kind of weather forecasting. In the countries bordering the
North Atlantic there is no practical need to turn to the waves for
weather information because meteorological stations are numerous and
strategically placed. The areas in which the wave recorders are
presently used have served rather as a testing laboratory to develop the
method. It will soon be ready for use in other parts of the world, for
which there are no meteorological data except those the waves bring.
Especially in the Southern Hemisphere, many coasts are washed by waves
that have come from lonely, unvisited parts of the ocean, seldom crossed
by vessels, off the normal routes of the air lines. Storms may develop
in these remote places, unobserved, and sweep down suddenly on mid-ocean
islands or exposed coasts. Over the millions of years the waves, running
ahead of the storms, have been crying a warning, but only now are we
learning to read their language. Or only now, at least, are we learning
to do so scientifically. There is a basis in folklore for these modern
achievements in wave research. To generations of Pacific Island natives,
a certain kind of swell has signaled the approach of a typhoon. And
centuries ago, when peasants on the lonely shores of Ireland saw the
long swells that herald a storm rolling in upon their coasts, they
shuddered and talked of death waves.

Now our study of waves has come of age, and on all sides we can find
evidence that modern man is turning to the waves of the sea for
practical purposes. Off the Fishing Pier at Long Branch, New Jersey, at
the end of a quarter-mile pipeline on the bed of the ocean, a
wave-recording instrument silently and continuously takes note of the
arrival of waves from the open Atlantic. By electric impulses
transmitted through the pipeline, the height of each wave and the
interval between succeeding crests are transmitted to a shore station
and automatically recorded as a graph. These records are carefully
studied by the Beach Erosion Board of the Army Corps of Engineers, which
is concerned about the rate of erosion along the New Jersey coast.

Off the coast of Africa, high-flying planes recently took a series of
overlapping photographs of the surf and the areas immediately offshore.
From these photographs, trained men determined the speed of the waves
moving in toward the shore. Then they applied a mathematical formula
that relates the behavior of waves advancing into shallow water to the
depths beneath them. All this information provided the British
government with usable surveys of the depths off the coast of an almost
inaccessible part of its empire, which could have been sounded in the
ordinary way only at great expense and with endless difficulty. Like
much of our new knowledge of waves, this practical method was born of
wartime necessity.

Forecasts of the state of the sea and particularly the height of the
surf became regular preliminaries to invasion in the Second World War,
especially on the exposed beaches of Europe and Africa. But application
of theory to practical conditions was at first difficult; so was the
interpretation of the actual effect of any predicted height of surf or
roughness of sea surface on the transfer of men and supplies between
boats or from boats to beaches. This first attempt at practical military
oceanography was, as one naval officer put it, a ‘most frightening
lesson’ concerning the ‘almost desperate lack of basic information on
the fundamentals of the nature of the sea.’

As long as there has been an earth, the moving masses of air that we
call winds have swept back and forth across its surface. And as long as
there has been an ocean, its waters have stirred to the passage of the
winds. Most waves are the result of the action of wind on water. There
are exceptions, such as the tidal waves sometimes produced by
earthquakes under the sea. But the waves most of us know best are wind
waves.

It is a confused pattern that the waves make in the open sea—a mixture
of countless different wave trains, intermingling, overtaking, passing,
or sometimes engulfing one another; each group differing from the others
in the place and manner of its origin, in its speed, its direction of
movement; some doomed never to reach any shore, others destined to roll
across half an ocean before they dissolve in thunder on a distant beach.

Out of such seemingly hopeless confusion the patient study of many men
over many years has brought a surprising amount of order. While there is
still much to be learned about waves, and much to be done to apply what
is known to man’s advantage, there is a solid basis of fact on which to
reconstruct the life history of a wave, predict its behavior under all
the changing circumstances of its life, and foretell its effect on human
affairs.

Before constructing an imaginary life history of a typical wave, we need
to become familiar with some of its physical characteristics. A wave has
height, from trough to crest. It has length, the distance from its crest
to that of the following wave. The period of the wave refers to the time
required for succeeding crests to pass a fixed point. None of these
dimensions is static; all change, but bear definite relations to the
wind, the depth of the water, and many other matters. Furthermore, the
water that composes a wave does not advance with it across the sea; each
water particle describes a circular or elliptical orbit with the passage
of the wave form, but returns very nearly to its original position. And
it is fortunate that this is so, for if the huge masses of water that
comprise a wave actually moved across the sea, navigation would be
impossible. Those who deal professionally in the lore of waves make
frequent use of a picturesque expression—the ‘length of fetch.’ The
‘fetch’ is the distance that the waves have run, under the drive of a
wind blowing in a constant direction, without obstruction. The greater
the fetch, the higher the waves. Really large waves cannot be generated
within the confined space of a bay or a small area. A fetch of perhaps
600 to 800 miles, with winds of gale velocity, is required to get up the
largest ocean waves.

Now let us suppose that, after a period of calm, a storm develops far
out in the Atlantic, perhaps a thousand miles from the New Jersey coast
where we are spending a summer holiday. Its winds blow irregularly, with
sudden gusts, shifting direction but in general blowing shoreward. The
sheet of water under the wind responds to the changing pressures. It is
no longer a level surface; it becomes furrowed with alternating troughs
and ridges. The waves move toward the coast, and the wind that created
them controls their destiny. As the storm continues and the waves move
shoreward, they receive energy from the wind and increase in height. Up
to a point they will continue to take to themselves the fierce energy of
the wind, growing in height as the strength of the gale is absorbed, but
when a wave becomes about a seventh as high from trough to crest as the
distance to the next crest it will begin to topple in foaming whitecaps.
Winds of hurricane force often blow the tops off the waves by their
sheer violence; in such a storm the highest waves may develop after the
wind has begun to subside.

But to return to our typical wave, born of wind and water far out in the
Atlantic, grown to its full height on the energy of the winds, with its
fellow waves forming a confused, irregular pattern known as a ‘sea.’ As
the waves gradually pass out of the storm area their height diminishes,
the distance between successive crests increases, and the ‘sea’ becomes
a ‘swell,’ moving at an average speed of about 15 miles an hour. Near
the coast a pattern of long, regular swells is substituted for the
turbulence of open ocean. But as the swell enters shallow water a
startling transformation takes place. For the first time in its
existence, the wave feels the drag of shoaling bottom. Its speed
slackens, crests of following waves crowd in toward it, abruptly its
height increases and the wave form steepens. Then with a spilling,
tumbling rush of water falling down into its trough, it dissolves in a
seething confusion of foam.

An observer sitting on a beach can make at least an intelligent guess
whether the surf spilling out onto the sand before him has been produced
by a gale close offshore or by a distant storm. Young waves, only
recently shaped by the wind, have a steep, peaked shape even well out at
sea. From far out on the horizon you can see them forming whitecaps as
they come in; bits of foam are spilling down their fronts and boiling
and bubbling over the advancing face, and the final breaking of the wave
is a prolonged and deliberate process. But if a wave, on coming into the
surf zone, rears high as though gathering all its strength for the final
act of its life, if the crest forms all along its advancing front and
then begins to curl forward, if the whole mass of water plunges suddenly
with a booming roar into its trough—then you may take it that these
waves are visitors from some very distant part of the ocean, that they
have traveled long and far before their final dissolution at your feet.

What is true of the Atlantic wave we have followed is true, in general,
of wind waves the world over. The incidents in the life of a wave are
many. How long it will live, how far it will travel, to what manner of
end it will come are all determined, in large measure, by the conditions
it meets in its progression across the face of the sea. For the one
essential quality of a wave is that it moves; anything that retards or
stops its motion dooms it to dissolution and death.

Forces within the sea itself may affect a wave most profoundly. Some of
the most terrible furies of the ocean are unleashed when tidal currents
cross the path of the waves or move in direct opposition to them. This
is the cause of the famous ‘roosts’ of Scotland, like the one off
Sumburgh Head, at the southernmost tip of the Shetland Islands. During
northeasterly winds the roost is quiescent, but when the wind-born waves
roll in from any other quarter they encounter the tidal currents, either
streaming shoreward in flood or seaward on the ebb. It is like the
meeting of two wild beasts. The battle of the waves and tides is fought
over an area of sea that may be three miles wide when the tides are
running at full strength, first off Sumburgh Head, then gradually
shifting seaward, subsiding only with the temporary slackening of the
tide. ‘In this confused, tumbling, and bursting sea, vessels often
become entirely unmanageable and sometimes founder,’ says the _British
Islands Pilot_, ‘while others have been tossed about for days together.’
Such dangerous waters have been personified in many parts of the world
by names that are handed down through generations of seafaring men. As
in the time of our grandfathers and of their grandfathers, the Bore of
Duncansby and the Merry Men of Mey rage at opposite ends of the Pentland
Firth, which separates the Orkney Islands from the northern tip of
Scotland. The sailing directions for the Firth in the _North Sea Pilot_
for 1875 contained a warning to mariners, which is repeated verbatim in
the modern _Pilot_:

    Before entering the Pentland Firth all vessels should be
    prepared to batten down, and the hatches of small vessels ought
    to be secured even in the finest weather, as it is difficult to
    see what may be going on in the distance, and the transition
    from smooth water to a broken sea is so sudden that no time is
    given for making arrangements.

Both roosts are caused by the meeting of swells from the open ocean and
opposing tidal currents, so that at the east end of the Firth the Bore
of Duncansby is to be feared with easterly swells and a flood tide, and
at the west end the Merry Men of Mey stage their revelries with the ebb
tides and a westerly swell. Then, according to the _Pilot_, ‘a sea is
raised which cannot be imagined by those who have never experienced it.’

Such a rip may offer protection to the near-by coast by the very fury
and uncompromisingness of the struggle between waves and tide. Thomas
Stevenson long ago observed that as long as the Sumburgh roost was
breaking and cresting heavily off the Head there was little surf on
shore; once the strength of the tide was spent and it could no longer
run down the seas a heavy surf rolled in against the coast and rose to
great heights on the cliffs. And in the western Atlantic, the confused
and swiftly running tidal currents at the mouth of the Bay of Fundy
offer such strong opposition to waves approaching from any quarter from
southwest to southeast that such surf as develops within the Bay is
almost entirely local in its origin.

Out in the open sea, a train of waves encountering a hostile wind may be
rapidly destroyed, for the power that created a wave may also destroy
it. So a fresh trade wind in the Atlantic has often flattened out the
swells as they rolled down from Iceland toward Africa. Or a friendly
wind, suddenly springing up to blow in the direction the waves are
moving, may cause their height to increase at the rate of a foot or two
per minute. Once a group of moving ridges has been created, the wind has
only to fall into the troughs between them to push up their crests
rapidly.

Rocky ledges, shoals of sand or clay or rock, and coastal islands in the
mouths of bays all play their part in the fate of the waves that advance
toward shore. The long swells that roll from the open ocean toward the
shores of northern New England seldom reach it in full strength. Their
energy is spent in passing over that great submerged highland known as
Georges Bank, the crests of whose highest hills approach the surface
over the Cultivator Shoals. The hindrance of these submarine hills, and
of the tidal currents that swirl around and across them, robs the long
ocean swells of their power. Or islands scattered within a bay or about
its mouth may so absorb the strength of the waves that the head of the
bay is free from surf. Even scattered reefs off a coast may offer it
great protection, by causing the highest waves to break there, so that
they never reach the shore.

Ice, snow, rain—all are enemies of the waves and under proper
conditions may knock down a sea or cushion the force of surf on a beach.
Within loose pack ice a vessel may count on smooth seas even if a gale
is raging and surf is breaking heavily about the edges of the pack. Ice
crystals forming in the sea will smooth the waves by increasing the
friction between water particles; even the delicate, crystalline form of
a snowflake has such an effect on a smaller scale. A hail storm will
knock down a rough sea, and even a sudden downpour of rain may often
turn the surface of the ocean to oiled-silk smoothness, rippling to the
passage of the swells.

The divers of ancient times who carried oil in their mouths to release
beneath the surface when rough water made their work difficult were
applying what every seaman today knows—that oil appears to have a
calming effect on the free waves of the open ocean. Instructions for the
use of oil in emergencies at sea are carried by most official sailing
directions of maritime nations. Oil has little effect on surf, however,
once the dissolution of the wave form has begun.

In the Southern Ocean where the waves are not destroyed by breaking on
any beach, the great swells produced by the westerly winds roll around
and around the world. Here the longest waves, and those with the
greatest sidewise expanse of crest, are formed. Here, it might be
supposed, the highest waves would also be found. Yet there is no
evidence that the waves of the Southern Ocean surpass the giants of any
other ocean. A long series of reports culled from the publications of
engineers and ships’ officers show that waves higher than 25 feet from
trough to crest are rare in all oceans. Storm waves may grow twice as
high, and if a full gale blows long enough in one direction to have a
fetch of 600 to 800 miles, the resulting waves may be even higher. The
greatest possible height of storm waves at sea is a much debated
question, with most textbooks citing a conservative 60 feet, and
mariners stubbornly describing much higher waves. Throughout the century
that has followed the report of Dumont d’Urville that he encountered a
wave 100 feet high off the Cape of Good Hope, science generally has
viewed such figures with skepticism. Yet there is one record of a giant
wave which, because of the method of measurement, seems to be accepted
as reliable.

In February 1933 the U.S.S. _Ramapo_, while proceeding from Manila to
San Diego, encountered seven days of stormy weather. The storm was part
of a weather disturbance that extended all the way from Kamchatka to New
York and permitted the winds an unbroken fetch of thousands of miles.
During the height of the storm the _Ramapo_ maintained a course running
down the wind and with the sea. On 6 February the gale reached its
fiercest intensity. Winds of 68 knots came in gusts and squalls, and the
seas reached mountainous height. While standing watch on the bridge
during the early hours of that day, one of the officers of the _Ramapo_
saw, in the moonlight, a great sea rising astern to a level above an
iron strap on the crow’s nest of the mainmast. The _Ramapo_ was on even
keel and her stem was in the trough of the sea. These circumstances made
possible an exact line of sight from the bridge to the crest of the
wave, and simple mathematical calculations based on the dimensions of
the ship gave the height of the wave. It was 112 feet.

Waves have taken their toll of shipping and of human life on the open
sea, but it is around the shorelines of the world that they are most
destructive. Whatever the height of storm waves at sea, there is
abundant evidence, as some of the case histories that follow will show,
that breaking surf and the upward-leaping water masses from thundering
breakers may engulf lighthouses, shatter buildings, and hurl stones
through lighthouse windows anywhere from 100 to 300 feet above the sea.
Before the power of such surf, piers and breakwaters and other shore
installations are fragile as a child’s toys.

Almost every coast of the world is visited periodically by violent storm
surf, but there are some that have never known the sea in its milder
moods. ‘There is not in the world a coast more terrible than this!’
exclaimed Lord Bryce of Tierra del Fuego, where the breakers roar in
upon the coast with a voice that, according to report, can be heard 20
miles inland on a still night. ‘The sight of such a coast,’ Darwin had
written in his diary, ‘is enough to make a landsman dream for a week
about death, peril, and shipwreck.’

Others claim that the Pacific coast of the United States from northern
California to the Straits of Juan de Fuca has a surf as heavy as any in
the world. But it seems unlikely that any coast is visited more
wrathfully by the sea’s waves than the Shetlands and the Orkneys, in the
path of the cyclonic storms that pass eastward between Iceland and the
British Isles. All the feeling and the fury of such a storm, couched
almost in Conradian prose, are contained in the usually prosaic _British
Islands Pilot_:

    In the terrific gales which usually occur four or five times in
    every year all distinction between air and water is lost, the
    nearest objects are obscured by spray, and everything seems
    enveloped in a thick smoke; upon the open coast the sea rises at
    once, and striking upon the rocky shores rises in foam for
    several hundred feet and spreads over the whole country.

    The sea, however, is not so heavy in the violent gales of short
    continuance as when an ordinary gale has been blowing for many
    days; the whole force of the Atlantic is then beating against
    the shores of the Orkneys, rocks of many tons in weight are
    lifted from their beds, and the roar of the surge may be heard
    for twenty miles; the breakers rise to the height of 60 feet,
    and the broken sea on the North Shoal, which lies 12 miles
    northwestward of Costa Head, is visible at Skail and Birsay.

The first man who ever measured the force of an ocean wave was Thomas
Stevenson, father of Robert Louis. Stevenson developed the instrument
known as a wave dynamometer and with it studied the waves that battered
the coast of his native Scotland. He found that in winter gales the
force of a wave might be as great as 6000 pounds to the square foot.
Perhaps it was waves of this strength that destroyed the breakwater at
Wick on the coast of Scotland in a December storm in 1872. The seaward
end of the Wick breakwater consisted of a block of concrete weighing
more than 800 tons, bound solidly with iron rods to underlying blocks of
stone. During the height of this winter gale the resident engineer
watched the onslaught of the waves from a point on the cliff above the
breakwater. Before his incredulous eyes, the block of concrete was
lifted up and swept shoreward. After the storm had subsided divers
investigated the wreckage. They found that not only the concrete
monolith but the stones it was attached to had been carried away. The
waves had torn loose, lifted, and bodily moved a mass weighing not less
than 1350 tons, or 2,700,000 pounds. Five years later it became clear
that this feat had been a mere dress rehearsal, for the new pier,
weighing about 2600 tons, was then carried away in another storm.

A list of the perverse and freakish doings of the sea can easily be
compiled from the records of the keepers of lights on lonely ledges at
sea, or on rocky headlands exposed to the full strength of storm surf.
At Unst, the most northern of the Shetland Islands, a door in the
lighthouse was broken open 195 feet above the sea. At the Bishop Rock
Light, on the English Channel, a bell was torn away from its attachment
100 feet above high water during a winter gale. About the Bell Rock
Light on the coast of Scotland one November day a heavy ground swell was
running, although there was no wind. Suddenly one of the swells rose
about the tower, mounted to the gilded ball atop the lantern, 117 feet
above the rock, and tore away a ladder that was attached to the tower 86
feet above the water. There have been happenings that, to some minds,
are tinged with the supernatural, like that at the Eddystone Light in
1840. The entrance door of the tower had been made fast by strong bolts,
as usual. During a night of heavy seas the door was broken open _from
within_, and all its iron bolts and hinges were torn loose. Engineers
say that such a thing happens as a result of pneumatic action—the
sudden back draught created by the recession of a heavy wave combined
with an abrupt release of pressure on the outside of the door.

On the Atlantic coast of the United States, the 97-foot tower on Minot’s
Ledge in Massachusetts is often completely enveloped by masses of water
from breaking surf, and an earlier light on this ledge was swept away in
1851. Then there is the often quoted story of the December storm at
Trinidad Head Light on the coast of northern California. As the keeper
watched the storm from his lantern 196 feet above high water, he could
see the near-by Pilot Rock engulfed again and again by waves that swept
over its hundred-foot crest. Then a wave, larger than the rest, struck
the cliffs at the base of the light. It seemed to rise in a solid wall
of water to the level of the lantern, and it hurled its spray completely
over the tower. The shock of the blow stopped the revolving of the
light.

Along a rocky coast, the waves of a severe storm are likely to be armed
with stones and rock fragments, which greatly increase their destructive
power. Once a rock weighing 135 pounds was hurled high above the
lightkeeper’s house on Tillamook Rock on the coast of Oregon, 100 feet
above sea level. In falling, it tore a 20-foot hole through the roof.
The same day showers of smaller rocks broke many panes of glass in the
lantern, 132 feet above the sea. The most amazing of such stories
concerns the lighthouse at Dunnet Head, which stands on the summit of a
300-foot cliff at the southwestern entrance to Pentland Firth. The
windows of this light have been broken repeatedly by stones swept from
the cliff and tossed aloft by waves.

For millennia beyond computation, the sea’s waves have battered the
coastlines of the world with erosive effect, here cutting back a cliff,
there stripping away tons of sand from a beach, and yet again, in a
reversal of their destructiveness, building up a bar or a small island.
Unlike the slow geologic changes that bring about the flooding of half a
continent, the work of the waves is attuned to the brief span of human
life, and so the sculpturing of the continent’s edge is something each
of us can see for ourselves.

The high clay cliff of Cape Cod, rising at Eastham and running north
until it is lost in the sand dunes near Peaked Hill, is wearing back so
fast that half of the ten acres which the Government acquired as a site
for the Highland Light has disappeared, and the cliffs are said to be
receding about three feet a year. Cape Cod is not old, in geologic
terms, being the product of the glaciers of the most recent Ice Age, but
apparently the waves have cut away, since its formation, a strip of land
some two miles wide. At the present rate of erosion, the disappearance
of the outer cape is foredoomed; it will presumably occur in another
4000 or 5000 years.

The sea’s method on a rocky coast is to wear it down by grinding, to
chisel out and wrench away fragments of rock, each of which becomes a
tool to wear away the cliff. And as masses of rock are undercut, a whole
huge mass will fall into the sea, there to be ground in the mill of the
surf and to contribute more weapons for the attack. On a rocky shore
this grinding and polishing of rocks and fragments of rocks goes on
incessantly and audibly, for the breakers on such a coast have a
different sound from those that have only sand to work with—a
deep-toned mutter and rumble not easily forgotten, even by one who
strolls casually along such a beach. Few people have heard the sounds of
the surf mill practically from within the sea, as described by Henwood
after his visit to a British mine extending out under the ocean:

    When standing beneath the base of the cliff, and in that part of
    the mine where but nine feet of rock stood between us and the
    ocean, the heavy roll of the larger boulders, the ceaseless
    grinding of the pebbles, the fierce thundering of the billows,
    with the crackling and boiling as they rebounded, placed a
    tempest in its most appalling form too vividly before me ever to
    be forgotten. More than once doubting the protection of our
    rocky shield we retreated in affright; and it was only after
    repeated trials that we had confidence to pursue our
    investigations.[G]

[G] From _Transactions_, Geol. Soc. Cornwall, vol. v, 1843.

-----

Great Britain, an island, has always been conscious of that ‘powerful
marine gnawing’ by which her coasts are eaten away. An old map dated
1786 and prepared by the county surveyor, John Tuke, gives a long list
of lost towns and villages on the Holderness Coast. Among them are
notations of Hornsea Burton, Hornsea Beck, and Hartburn—‘washed away by
the sea’; of Ancient Withernsea, Hyde, or Hythe—‘lost by the sea.’ Many
other old records allow comparison of present shorelines with former
ones and show astonishing annual rates of cliff erosion on many parts of
the coast—up to 15 feet at Holderness, 19 feet between Cromer and
Mundesley, and 15 to 45 feet at Southwold. ‘The configuration of the
coastline of Great Britain,’ one of her present engineers writes, ‘is
not the same for two consecutive days.’

And yet we owe some of the most beautiful and interesting shoreline
scenery to the sculpturing effect of moving water. Sea caves are almost
literally blasted out of the cliffs by waves, which pour into crevices
in the rocks and force them apart by hydraulic pressure. Over the years
the widening of fissures and the steady removal of fine rock particles
in infinite number result in the excavation of a cave. Within such a
cavern the weight of incoming water and the strange suctions and
pressures caused by the movements of water in an enclosed space may
continue the excavation upward. The roofs of such caves (and of
overhanging cliffs) are subjected to blows like those from a battering
ram as the water from a breaking wave is hurled upward, most of the
energy of the wave passing into this smaller mass of water. Eventually a
hole is torn through the roof of the cave, to form a spouting horn. Or,
on a narrow promontory, what began as a cave may be cut through from
side to side, so that a natural bridge is formed. Later, after years of
erosion, the arch may fall, leaving the seaward mass of rock to stand
alone—one of the strange, chimneylike formations known as a stack.

The sea waves that have fixed themselves most firmly in the human
imagination are the so-called ‘tidal waves.’ The term is popularly
applied to two very different kinds of waves, neither of which has any
relation to the tide. One is a seismic sea wave produced by undersea
earthquakes; the other is an exceptionally vast wind or storm wave—an
immense mass of water driven by winds of hurricane force far above the
normal high-water line.

Most of the seismic sea waves, now called ‘tsunamis,’ are born in the
deepest trenches of the ocean floor. The Japanese, Aleutian, and Atacama
trenches have each produced waves that claimed many human lives. Such a
trench is, by its very nature, a breeder of earthquakes, being a place
of disturbed and uneasy equilibrium, of buckling and warping downward of
the sea floor to form the deepest pits of all the earth’s surface. From
the historic records of the ancients down to the modern newspaper, the
writings of man contain frequent mention of the devastation or coastal
settlements by these great waves that suddenly rise out of the sea. One
of the earliest of record rose along the eastern shores of the
Mediterranean in A.D. 358, passing completely over islands and low-lying
shores, leaving boats on the housetops of Alexandria, and drowning
thousands of people. After the Lisbon earthquake of 1755, the coast at
Cadiz was visited by a wave said to have been 50 feet higher than the
highest tide. This came about an hour after the earthquake. The waves
from this same disturbance traveled across the Atlantic and reached the
West Indies in 9½ hours. In 1868, a stretch of nearly 3000 miles of the
western coast of South America was shaken by earthquakes. Shortly after
the most violent shocks, the sea receded from the shore, leaving ships
that had been anchored in 40 feet of water stranded in mud; then the
water returned in a great wave, and boats were carried a quarter of a
mile inland.

This ominous withdrawal of the sea from its normal stand is often the
first warning of the approach of seismic sea waves. Natives on the
beaches of Hawaii on the first of April 1946 were alarmed when the
accustomed voice of the breakers was suddenly stilled, leaving a strange
quiet. They could not know that this recession of the waves from the
reefs and the shallow coastal waters was the sea’s response to an
earthquake on the steep slopes of a deep trench off the island of Unimak
in the Aleutian chain, more than 2000 miles away; or that in a matter of
moments the water would rise rapidly, as though the tide were coming in
much too fast, but without surf. The rise carried the ocean waters 25
feet or more above the normal levels of the tide. According to an
eyewitness account:

    The waves of the tsunami swept toward shore with steep fronts
    and great turbulence . . . Between crests the water withdrew
    from shore, exposing reefs, coastal mud-flats, and harbor
    bottoms for distances up to 500 feet or more from the normal
    strand-line. The outflow of the water was rapid and turbulent,
    making a loud hissing, roaring, and rattling noise. At several
    places houses were carried out to sea, and in some areas even
    large rocks and blocks of concrete were carried out onto the
    reefs . . . People and their belongings were swept to sea, some
    being rescued hours later by boats and life rafts dropped from
    planes.[H]

[H] From _Annual Rept._, Smithsonian Inst., 1947.

-----

In the open ocean the waves produced by the Aleutian quake were only
about a foot or two high and would not be noticed from vessels. Their
length, however, was enormous, with a distance of about 90 miles between
succeeding crests. It took the waves less than five hours to reach the
Hawaiian chain, 2300 miles distant, so they must have moved at an
average speed of about 470 miles per hour. Along eastern Pacific shores,
they were recorded as far into the Southern Hemisphere as Valparaiso,
Chile, the distance of 8066 miles from the epicenter being covered by
the waves in about 18 hours.

This particular occurrence of seismic sea waves had one result that
distinguished it from all its predecessors. It set people to thinking
that perhaps we now know enough about such waves and how they behave
that a warning system could be devised which would rob them of the
terror of the unexpected. Seismologists and specialists on waves and
tides co-operated, and now such a system has been established to protect
the Hawaiian Islands. A network of stations equipped with special
instruments is scattered over the Pacific from Kodiak to Pago Pago and
from Balboa to Palau. There are two phases of the warning system. One is
based on a new audible alarm at seismograph stations operated by the
United States Coast and Geodetic Survey, which calls instant attention
to the fact that an earthquake has occurred. If it is found that the
epicenter of the quake is under the ocean and so might produce seismic
sea waves, a warning is sent to observers at selected tide stations to
watch their gauges for evidence of the passage of the racing tsunamis.
(Even a very small seismic sea wave can be identified by its peculiar
period, and though it may be small at one place, it may reach dangerous
heights at another.) When seismologists in Honolulu are notified that an
undersea earthquake has occurred and that its waves have actually been
recorded at certain stations, they can calculate when the waves will
arrive at any point between the epicenter of the quake and the Hawaiian
Islands. They can then issue warnings for the evacuation of beaches and
waterfront areas. And so, for the first time in history, there is an
organized effort to prevent these ominous waves from racing undetected
over the empty spaces of the Pacific, to roar up suddenly on some
inhabited shore.[12]

The storm waves that sometimes rise over low-lying coast lands in
hurricane zones belong in the class of wind waves, but unlike the waves
of ordinary winds and storms, they are accompanied by a rise of the
general water level, called a storm tide. The rise of water is often so
sudden that it leaves no possibility of escape. Such storm waves claim
about three-fourths of the lives lost by tropical hurricanes. The most
notable disasters from storm waves in the United States have been those
at Galveston, Texas, on 8 September, 1900, on the lower Florida Keys on
2 and 3 September, 1935, and the catastrophic rise of water accompanying
the New England hurricane of 21 September, 1938. The most fearful
destruction by hurricane waves within historic time occurred in the Bay
of Bengal on 7 October, 1737, when 20,000 boats were destroyed and
300,000 people drowned.[13]

There are other great waves, usually called ‘rollers,’ that periodically
rise on certain coasts and batter them for days with damaging surf.
These, too, are wind waves, but they are related to changes in
barometric pressure over the ocean, perhaps several thousand miles
distant from the beaches on which the waves eventually arrive.
Low-pressure areas—like the one south of Iceland—are notorious storm
breeders, their winds lashing the sea into great waves. After the waves
leave the storm area they tend to become lower and longer and after
perhaps thousands of miles of travel across the sea they become
transformed into the undulations known as a ground swell. These swells
are so regular and so low that often they are unnoticed as they pass
through the short, choppy, new-formed waves of other areas. But when a
swell approaches a coast and feels beneath it the gradually shoaling
bottom, it begins to ‘peak up’ into a high, steep wave; within the surf
zone the steepening becomes abruptly accentuated, a crest forms, breaks,
and a great mass of water plunges downward.

Winter swell on the west coast of North America is the product of storms
that travel south of the Aleutians into the Gulf of Alaska. Swell
reaching this same coast during the summer has been traced back to its
origin in the Southern Hemisphere belt of the ‘roaring forties,’ several
thousand miles south of the equator. Because of the direction of the
prevailing winds, the American east coast and the Gulf of Mexico do not
receive the swell from far distant storms.

The coast of Morocco has always been particularly at the mercy of swell,
for there is no protected harbor from the Strait of Gibraltar southward
for some 500 miles. The rollers that visit the Atlantic islands of
Ascension, St. Helena, South Trinidad, and Fernando de Noronha are
historic. Apparently the same sort of waves occur on the South American
coast near Rio de Janeiro, where they are known as resacas; others of
kindred nature, having run their course from storms in the west-wind
belt of the South Pacific, attack the shores of the Paumotos Islands;
still others have been responsible for the well-known ‘surf days’ that
plague the Pacific coast of South America. According to Robert Cushman
Murphy, it was formerly the custom of shipmasters in the guano trade to
demand a special allowance for a certain number of days during which the
loading of their vessels would be interrupted by the swell. On such surf
days ‘mighty rollers come pouring over the sea wall, and have been known
to carry away forty-ton freight cars, to uproot concrete piers, and to
twist iron rails like wire.’

The slow progression of swell from its place of origin made it possible
for the Moroccan Protectorate to establish a service for the prediction
of the state of the sea. This was done in 1921, after long and
troublesome experience with wrecked vessels and wharves. Daily
telegraphic reports of the condition of the sea give advance notice of
troublesome surf days. Warned of the approach of swells, ships in port
may seek safety in the open sea. Before this service was established,
the port of Casablanca had once been paralyzed for seven months, and St.
Helena had seen the wreckage of practically all the ships in her harbor
on one or more occasions. Modern wave-recording instruments like those
now being tested in England and the United States will soon provide even
greater security for all such shores.

It is always the unseen that most deeply stirs our imagination, and so
it is with waves. The largest and most awe-inspiring waves of the ocean
are invisible; they move on their mysterious courses far down in the
hidden depths of the sea, rolling ponderously and unceasingly. For many
years it was known that the vessels of Arctic expeditions often became
almost trapped and made headway only with difficulty in what was called
‘dead water’—now recognized as internal waves at the boundary between a
thin surface layer of fresh water and the underlying salt water. In the
early 1900’s several Scandinavian hydrographers called attention to the
existence of submarine waves, but another generation was to elapse
before science had the instruments to study them thoroughly.

Now, even though mystery still surrounds the causes of these great waves
that rise and fall, far below the surface, their ocean-wide occurrence
is well established. Down in deep water they toss submarines about, just
as their surface counterparts set ships to rolling. They seem to break
against the Gulf Stream and other strong currents in a deep-sea version
of the dramatic meeting of surface waves and opposing tidal currents.
Probably internal waves occur wherever there is a boundary between
layers of dissimilar water, just as the waves we see occur at the
boundary between air and sea. But these are waves such as never moved at
the surface of the ocean. The water masses involved are unthinkably
great, some of the waves being as high as 300 feet.

Of their effect on fishes and other life of the deep sea we have only
the faintest conception. Swedish scientists say that the herring are
carried or drawn into some of the fiords of Sweden when the deep
internal waves roll over the submerged sills and into the fiords. In the
open ocean, we know that the boundary between water masses of different
temperatures or salinities is often a barrier that may not be passed by
living creatures, delicately adjusted to certain conditions. Do these
creatures themselves then move up and down with the roll of the deep
waves? And what happens to the bottom fauna of the continental slope,
adjusted, it may be, to water of unchanging warmth? What is their fate
when the waves move in from a region of arctic cold, rolling like a
storm surf against those deep, dark slopes? At present we do not know.
We can only sense that in the deep and turbulent recesses of the sea are
hidden mysteries far greater than any we have solved.

[Illustration: _Paul Popper, Ltd._ Countless billions of tiny shells
compose the cliffs of Dover]

[Illustration: _Ludwig Schuster_ Surf pounds endlessly on the shores of
the world]

[Illustration: _Devaney, Inc., N.Y._ Minot’s Light withstands raging
surf on the Massachusetts coast]

[Illustration: _Paul Popper, Ltd._ Waves have cut away softer rock,
leaving chimneylike stack]

[Illustration: _Philip Gendreau_ The face of the sea in a storm]

[Illustration: _Paul Popper, Ltd._ Coral rock, once formed beneath the
sea, now is sculptured by waves]




[Illustration: _Official U. S. Coast Guard Photo_]

[Illustration: _United Press International Photo_]





_Right_: Seismic sea waves of April 1, 1946, carried away a lighthouse
at Scotch Cap, Alaska, 90 feet above the sea, and also smashed shore
structures on Hawaiian Islands.

[Illustration: _Dr. Wolff & Tritschler_ Clouds draw heat energy from
tropical seas to fuel the wind systems of the globe]




               _Wind, Sun, and the Spinning of the Earth_


              FOR THOUSANDS UPON THOUSANDS OF YEARS THE SUNLIGHT AND THE
                  SEA AND THE MASTERLESS WINDS HAVE HELD TRYST TOGETHER.
                                                         —LLEWELYN POWYS

AS the _Albatross III_ groped through fog over Georges Bank all of one
week in the midsummer of 1949, those of us aboard had a personal
demonstration of the power of a great ocean current. There was never
less than a hundred miles of cold Atlantic water between us and the Gulf
Stream, but the winds blew persistently from the south and the warm
breath of the Stream rolled over the Bank. The combination of warm air
and cold water spelled unending fog. Day after day the _Albatross_ moved
in a small circular room, whose walls were soft gray curtains and whose
floor had a glassy smoothness. Sometimes a petrel flew, with
swallow-like flutterings, across this room, entering and leaving it by
passing through its walls as if by sorcery. Evenings, the sun, before it
set, was a pale silver disc hung in the ship’s rigging, the drifting
streamers of fog picking up a diffused radiance and creating a scene
that set us to searching our memories for quotations from Coleridge. The
sense of a powerful presence felt but not seen, its nearness made
manifest but never revealed, was infinitely more dramatic than a direct
encounter with the current.

The permanent currents of the ocean are, in a way, the most majestic of
her phenomena. Reflecting upon them, our minds are at once taken out
from the earth so that we can regard, as from another planet, the
spinning of the globe, the winds that deeply trouble its surface or
gently encompass it, and the influence of the sun and the moon. For all
these cosmic forces are closely linked with the great currents of the
ocean, earning for them the adjective I like best of all those applied
to them—the planetary currents.

Since the world began, the ocean currents have undoubtedly changed their
courses many times (we know, for example, that the Gulf Stream is no
more than about 60 million years old); but it would be a bold writer who
would try to describe their pattern in the Cambrian period, for example,
or in the Devonian, or in the Jurassic. So far as the brief period of
human history is concerned, however, it is most unlikely that there has
been any important change in the major patterns of oceanic circulation,
and the first thing that impresses us about the currents is their
permanence. This is not surprising, for the forces that produce the
currents show little disposition to change materially over the eons of
earthly time. The primary driving power is supplied by the winds; the
modifying influences are the sun, the revolving of the earth ever toward
the east, and the obstructing masses of the continents.

The surface of the sea is unequally heated by the sun; as the water is
warmed it expands and becomes lighter, while the cold water becomes
heavier and more dense. Probably a slow exchange of polar and equatorial
waters is brought about by these differences, the heated water of the
tropics moving poleward in the upper layers, and polar water creeping
toward the equator along the floor of the sea. But these movements are
obscured and largely lost in the far greater sweep of the wind-driven
currents. The steadiest winds are the trades, blowing diagonally toward
the equator from the northeast and southeast. It is the trades that
drive the equatorial currents around the globe. On wind and water alike,
as on all that moves, be it a ship, a bullet, or a bird, the spinning
earth exerts a deflecting force, turning all moving objects to the right
in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern. Through the
combined action of these and other forces, the resulting current
patterns are slowly circulating eddies, turning to the right, or
clockwise, in the northern oceans, and to the left, or counterclockwise,
in the southern.

There are exceptions, and the Indian Ocean, which seems never to be
quite like the others, is an important one. Ruled by the capricious
monsoons, its currents shift with the seasons. North of the equator, the
direction of flow of immense masses of water may be either eastward or
westward, depending on which of the monsoons is blowing. In the southern
part of this ocean a fairly typical counterclockwise pattern exists:
westward under the equator, south along the African coast, east to
Australia on the westerly winds, northward by devious and seasonally
shifting paths, here giving up water to the Pacific and there receiving
contributions from it.

The Antarctic Ocean, being merely a continuous band of water encircling
the globe, is another exception to the typical current pattern. Its
waters are driven constantly into the east and the northeast by winds
from the west and the southwest, and the currents are given speed by the
quantities of fresh water pouring in from melting ice. It is not a
closed circulation; water is given off, in surface currents and by deep
paths, to the adjacent oceans, and in return other water is received
from them.

It is in the Atlantic and Pacific that we see most clearly the interplay
of cosmic forces producing the planetary currents.

Perhaps because of the long centuries over which the Atlantic has been
crossed and recrossed by trade routes, its currents have been longest
known to seafaring men and best studied by oceanographers. The strongly
running Equatorial Currents were familiar to generations of seamen in
the days of sail. So determined was their set to westward that vessels
intending to pass down into the South Atlantic could make no headway
unless they had gained the necessary easting in the region of the
southeast trades. Ponce de Leon’s three ships, sailing south from Cape
Canaveral to Tortugas in 1513, sometimes were unable to stem the Gulf
Stream, and ‘although they had great wind, they could not proceed
forward, but backward.’ A few years later Spanish shipmasters learned to
take advantage of the currents, sailing westward in the Equatorial
Current, but returning home via the Gulf Stream as far as Cape Hatteras,
whence they launched out into the open Atlantic.

The first chart of the Gulf Stream was prepared about 1769 under the
direction of Benjamin Franklin while he was Deputy Postmaster General of
the Colonies. The Board of Customs in Boston had complained that the
mail packets coming from England took two weeks longer to make the
westward crossing than did the Rhode Island merchant ships. Franklin,
perplexed, took the problem to a Nantucket sea captain, Timothy Folger,
who told him this might very well be true because the Rhode Island
captains were well acquainted with the Gulf Stream and avoided it on the
westward crossing, whereas the English captains were not. Folger and
other Nantucket whalers were personally familiar with the Stream
because, he explained,

    in our pursuit of whales, which keep to the sides of it but are
    not met within it, we run along the side and frequently cross it
    to change our side, and in crossing it have sometimes met and
    spoke with those packets who were in the middle of it and
    stemming it. We have informed them that they were stemming a
    current that was against them to the value of three miles an
    hour and advised them to cross it, but they were too wise to be
    counselled by simple American fishermen.[I]

[I] From Am. Phil. Soc. _Trans._, vol. 2, 1786.

-----

Franklin, thinking ‘it was a pity no notice was taken of this current
upon the charts,’ asked Folger to mark it out for him. The course of the
Gulf Stream was then engraved on an old chart of the Atlantic and sent
by Franklin to Falmouth, England, for the captains of the packets, ‘who
slighted it, however.’ It was later printed in France and after the
Revolution was published in the _Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society_. The thriftiness of the Philosophical Society
editors led them to combine in one plate Franklin’s chart and a wholly
separate figure intended to illustrate a paper by John Gilpin on the
‘Annual Migrations of the Herring.’ Some later historians have
erroneously assumed a connection between Franklin’s conception of the
Gulf Stream and the insert in the upper left corner (see back end
paper).

Were it not for the deflecting barrier of the Panamanian isthmus, the
North Equatorial Current would cross into the Pacific, as indeed it must
have done through the many geologic ages when the continents of North
and South America were separated. After the Panama ridge was formed in
the late Cretaceous period, the current was doubled back to the
northeast to re-enter the Atlantic as the Gulf Stream. From the Yucatan
Channel eastward through the Florida Straits the Stream attains
impressive proportions. If thought of in the time-honored conception of
a ‘river’ in the sea, its width from bank to bank is 95 miles. It is a
mile deep from surface to river bed. It flows with a velocity of nearly
three knots and its volume is that of several hundred Mississippis.

Even in these days of Diesel power, the coastwise shipping off southern
Florida shows a wholesome respect for the Gulf Stream. Almost any day,
if you are out in a small boat below Miami, you can see the big
freighters and tankers moving south in a course that seems surprisingly
close to the Keys. Landward is the almost unbroken wall of submerged
reefs where the big niggerhead corals send their solid bulks up to
within a fathom or two of the surface. To seaward is the Gulf Stream,
and while the big boats could fight their way south against it, they
would consume much time and fuel in doing so. Therefore they pick their
way with care between the reefs and the Stream.

The energy of the Stream off southern Florida probably results from the
fact that here it is actually flowing downhill. Strong easterly winds
pile up so much surface water in the narrow Yucatan Channel and in the
Gulf of Mexico that the sea level there is higher than in the open
Atlantic. At Cedar Keys, on the Gulf coast of Florida, the level of the
sea is 19 centimeters (about 7½ inches) higher than at St. Augustine.
There is further unevenness of level within the current itself. The
lighter water is deflected by the earth’s rotation toward the right side
of the current, so that within the Gulf Stream the sea surface actually
slopes upward toward the right. Along the coast of Cuba, the ocean is
about 18 inches higher than along the mainland, thus upsetting
completely our notions that ‘sea level’ is a literal expression.

Northward, the Stream follows the contours of the continental slope to
the offing of Cape Hatteras, whence it turns more to seaward, deserting
the sunken edge of the land. But it has left its impress on the
continent. The four beautifully sculptured capes of the southern
Atlantic coast—Canaveral, Fear, Lookout, Hatteras—apparently have been
molded by powerful eddies set up by the passage of the Stream. Each is a
cusp projecting seaward; between each pair of capes the beach runs in a
long curving arc—the expression of the rhythmically swirling waters of
the Gulf Stream eddies.

Beyond Hatteras, the Stream leaves the shelf, turning northeastward, as
a narrow, meandering current, always sharply separated from the water on
either side. Off the ‘tail’ of the Grand Banks the line is most sharply
drawn between the cold, bottle-green arctic water of the Labrador
Current and the warm indigo blue of the Stream. In winter the
temperature change across the current boundary is so abrupt that as a
ship crosses into the Gulf Stream her bow may be momentarily in water
20° warmer than that at her stem, as though the ‘cold wall’ were a solid
barrier separating the two water masses. One of the densest fog banks in
the world lies in this region over the cold water of the Labrador
Current—a thick, blanketing whiteness that is the atmospheric response
to the Gulf Stream’s invasion of the cold northern seas.

Where the Stream feels the rise of the ocean floor known as the ‘tail’
of the Grand Banks, it bends eastward and begins to spread out into many
complexly curving tongues. Probably the force of the arctic water, the
water that has come down from Baffin Bay and Greenland, freighting its
icebergs, helps push the Stream to the east—that, and the deflecting
force of the earth’s rotation, always turning the currents to the right.
The Labrador Current itself (being a southward-moving current) is turned
in toward the mainland. The next time you wonder why the water is so
cold at certain coastal resorts of the eastern United States, remember
that the water of the Labrador Current is between you and the Gulf
Stream.

Passing across the Atlantic, the Stream becomes less a current than a
drift of water, fanning out in three main directions: southward into the
Sargasso; northward into the Norwegian Sea, where it forms eddies and
deep vortices; eastward to warm the coast of Europe (some of it even to
pass into the Mediterranean) and thence as the Canary Current to rejoin
the Equatorial Current and close the circuit.[14]

The Atlantic currents of the Southern Hemisphere are practically a
mirror image of those of the Northern. The great spiral moves
counterclockwise—west, south, east, north. Here the dominant current is
in the eastern instead of the western part of the ocean. It is the
Benguela Current, a river of cold water moving northward along the west
coast of Africa. The South Equatorial Current, in mid-ocean a powerful
stream (the _Challenger_ scientists said it poured past St. Paul’s Rocks
like a millrace) loses a substantial part of its waters to the North
Atlantic off the coast of South America—about 6 million cubic meters a
second. The remainder becomes the Brazil Current, which circles south
and then turns east as the South Atlantic or Antarctic Current. The
whole is a system of shallow water movements, involving throughout much
of its course not more than the upper hundred fathoms.

The North Equatorial Current of the Pacific is the longest westerly
running current on earth, with nothing to deflect it in its 9000-mile
course from Panama to the Philippines. There, meeting the barrier of the
islands, most of it swings northward as the Japan Current—Asia’s
counterpart of the Gulf Stream. A small part persists on its westward
course, feeling its way amid the labyrinth of Asiatic islands; part
turns upon itself and streams back along the equator as the Equatorial
Countercurrent. The Japan Current—called Kuroshio or Black Current
because of the deep, indigo blue of its waters—rolls northward along
the continental shelf off eastern Asia, until it is driven away from the
continent by a mass of icy water—the Oyashio—that pours out of the Sea
of Okhotsk and Bering Sea. The Japan Current and Oyashio meet in a
region of fog and tempestuous winds, as, in the North Atlantic, the
meeting of the Gulf Stream and the Labrador Current is marked with fog.
Drifting toward America, the Japan Current forms the northern wall of
the great North Pacific eddy. Its warm waters become chilled with
infusions of cold polar water from Oyashio, the Aleutians, and Alaska.
When it reaches the mainland of America it is a cool current, moving
southward along the coast of California. There it is further cooled by
updrafts of deep water and has much to do with the temperate summer
climate of the American west coast. Off Lower California it rejoins the
North Equatorial Current.

What with all the immensity of space in the South Pacific, we should
expect to find here the most powerfully impressive of all ocean
currents, but this does not seem to be true. The South Equatorial
Current has its course so frequently interrupted by islands, which are
forever deflecting streams of its water into the central basin, that by
the time it approaches Asia it is, during most seasons, a comparatively
feeble current, lost in a confused and ill-defined pattern around the
East Indies and Australia.[15] The West Wind Drift or Antarctic
Current—the poleward arc of the spiral—is born of the strongest winds
in the world, roaring across stretches of ocean almost unbroken by land.
The details of this, as of most of the currents of the South Pacific,
are but imperfectly known. Only one has been thoroughly studied—the
Humboldt—and this has so direct an effect on human affairs that it
overshadows all others.

The Humboldt Current, sometimes called the Peru, flows northward along
the west coast of South America, carrying waters almost as cold as the
Antarctic from which it comes. But its chill is actually that of the
deep ocean, for the current is reinforced by almost continuous upwelling
from lower oceanic layers. It is because of the Humboldt that penguins
live almost under the equator, on the Galapagos Islands. In these cold
waters, rich in minerals, there is an abundance of sea life perhaps
unparalleled anywhere else in the world. The direct harvesters of this
sea life are not men, but millions of sea birds. From the sun-baked
accumulations of guano that whiten the coastal cliffs and islands, the
South Americans obtain, at second hand, the wealth of the Humboldt
Current.

Robert E. Coker, who studied the Peruvian guano industry at the request
of that government, gives a vivid picture of the life of the Humboldt.
He writes of

    . . . immense schools of small fishes, the anchobetas, which are
    followed by numbers of bonitos and other fishes and by sea
    lions, while at the same time they are preyed upon by the flocks
    of cormorants, pelicans, gannets, and other abundant sea birds
    . . . The long files of pelicans, the low-moving black clouds of
    cormorants, or the rainstorms of plunging gannets probably
    cannot be equaled in any other part of the world. The birds feed
    chiefly, almost exclusively, upon the anchobetas. The anchobeta,
    then, is not only . . . the food of the larger fishes, but, as
    the food of the birds, it is the source from which is derived
    each year probably a score of thousands of tons of high-grade
    bird guano.[J]

[J] From _Bulletin_, U. S. Bureau of Fisheries, vol. XXVIII, part 1,
1908, p. 338.

-----

Dr. Coker estimated the annual consumption of fish by the
guano-producing birds of Peru as equal to a fourth of the total
production of all United States fisheries. Because of this diet, which
links the birds with all the minerals of the sea, their excrement is the
most valuable and efficient fertilizer in the world.

Leaving the coast of South America at about the latitude of Cape Blanco,
the Humboldt Current turns westward into the Pacific, carrying its cool
waters almost to the equator. About the Galapagos Islands it gives rise
to a strange mixture of waters—the cool green of the Humboldt and the
blue equatorial waters meeting in rips and foam lines, suggesting hidden
movements and conflicts deep in the sea.

The conflict between opposing water masses may, in places, be one of the
most dramatic of the ocean’s phenomena. Superficial hissings and
sighings, the striping of the surface waters with lines of froth, a
confused turbulence and boiling, and even sounds like distant breakers
accompany the displacement of the surface layers by deep water. As
visible evidence of the upward movement of the water masses, some of the
creatures that inhabit the deeper places of the sea may be carried up
bodily into the surface, there to set off orgies of devouring and being
devoured such as Robert Cushman Murphy witnessed one night off the coast
of Colombia from the schooner _Askoy_. The night had been still and
dark, but the behavior of the surface made it clear that deep water was
rising and that some sort of conflict was in progress among opposing
water masses far below the ship. All about the schooner small, steep
waves leaped into being and dissolved in foaming whitecaps, pricked with
the blue fire of luminescent organisms. Suddenly,

    On either side, and at a bafflingly uncertain distance from the
    ship, a dark line, like a wall of advancing water, seemed to be
    closing in upon us . . . We could hear the splash and murmur of
    a troubled surface close by . . . Presently we could see a gleam
    of foam sprinkled with points of luminescence on the slowly
    approaching swell or head to the left. Vague and unfounded
    thoughts of marine earthquake bores occurred to Fallon and me
    together, and we felt peculiarly helpless with a dismantled
    engine and no breeze to make the craft answer her helm. The
    dreamlike slowness of all that was going on, moreover, gave me a
    feeling that I had not yet fully shaken off the bonds of three
    hours’ slumber.

    However, when the dark, white-outlined menace reached us, it
    proved to be nothing more than a field of the dancing water,
    tossing its little peaks a mere foot or so into the air and
    beating a tattoo on the steel flanks of ‘Askoy’ . . .

    Presently a sharp hissing sound, different in character from the
    bursting of small waves, came out of the darkness to starboard,
    and this was followed by strange sighings and puffings . . . The
    puffers were blackfish, many scores, or perhaps hundreds of
    them, rolling and lumbering along and diving to pass beneath
    ‘Askoy’ shortly before they reached her bilge . . . We could
    hear the bacchanalian clamor of their rumblings and belchings.
    In the long beam of the searchlight, the hissing proved to come
    from the jumping of small fishes. In all directions as far as
    the light carried, they were shooting into the air and pouring
    down like hail . . .

    The surface was seething, boiling with life, much of which was
    _de profundis_. Larvae of clawless lobsters, tinted jellyfish,
    nurse chains of salps, small herringlike fishes, a silvery
    hatchetfish with its face bitten off, rudder fishes, hanging
    head downward, luminous lantern-fishes with shining light pores,
    red and purple swimming crabs, other creatures which we could
    not name at sight and much that was too small even to see
    distinctly . . .

    A general holocaust was in progress. The little fishes were
    eating invertebrates or straining out the plankton; the squids
    were pursuing and capturing fish of various sizes; and the
    blackfish were no doubt enjoying the squids . . .

    As the night wore on, the amazing manifestations of abundance
    and devouring gradually, almost imperceptibly, died away.
    Eventually, ‘Askoy’ lay once more in water that seemed as still
    and dead as oil, and the lap-lap of skipping waves drew off
    farther and farther into the distance until it was lost.[K]

[K] From _Natural History_, vol. LIII, no. 8, 1944, p. 356.

-----

Although such exciting displays of upwelling are seen and recognized by
comparatively few people, the process takes place regularly off a number
of coasts and at many places in the open ocean. Wherever it occurs, it
is responsible for a profusion of life. Some of the world’s largest
fisheries are dependent on upwelling. The coast of Algeria is famous for
its sardine fisheries; the sardines are abundant here because upward
streams of deep, cold water provide the minerals to support astronomical
numbers of diatoms. The west coast of Morocco, the area opposite the
Canary and Cape Verde islands, and the southwest coast of Africa are
other sites of extensive upwelling and consequent richness of marine
life. There is an amazingly abundant fish fauna in the Arabian Sea near
Oman and on the Somali Coast near Cape Hafun, both occurring in areas of
cold water rising from the depths. In the South Equatorial Current north
of Ascension Island is a ‘tongue of cold’ produced by the rise of sea
water from the bottom. It is extraordinarily rich in plankton. Upwelling
around the island of South Georgia, east of Cape Horn, makes this one of
the world’s centers of whaling. On the west coast of the United States
the catch of sardines is sometimes as much as a billion pounds in a
year, supporting one of the largest fisheries in the world. The fishery
could not exist except for upwelling, which sets off the old, familiar
biological chain: salts, diatoms, copepods, herring. Down along the west
coast of South America, the astonishing profusion of life in the
Humboldt is maintained by upwelling, which not only keeps the waters of
the current cold in all its 2500-mile course to the Galapagos Islands
but brings up the nutrient salts from the deeper layers.

When upwelling takes place along coastlines, it is the result of the
interplay of several forces—the winds, the surface currents, the
rotation of the earth, and the shape of the hidden slopes of the
continent’s foundations. When the winds, combined with the deflecting
effect of rotation, blow the surface waters offshore, deep water must
rise to replace it.

Upwelling may occur in the open sea as well, but from entirely different
causes. Wherever two strongly moving currents diverge, water must rise
from below to fill the place where the streams separate. One such place
lies at the westernmost bounds of the Equatorial Current in the Pacific,
where the powerfully moving stream turns and pours part of its waters
back into the counter-current, and part northward toward Japan. These
are confused and turbulent waters. There is the strong pull to the north
by which the main stream, sensitive to the force of the rotating earth,
turns to the right. There are the swirls and eddies by which the lesser
stream turns again upon itself and flows back into the eastern Pacific.
There is the rushing up from below to fill the otherwise deepening
groove between the streams. In the resulting disquietude of the ocean
waters, chilled and enriched from below, the smaller organisms of the
plankton thrive. As they multiply, they provide food for the larger
plankton creatures, which, in turn, provide food for squid and fish.
These waters are prodigiously rich in life, and there is evidence that
they may have been so for many thousands of years. Swedish
oceanographers recently found that under these areas of divergence the
sediment layer is exceptionally thick—the layer composed of all that
remains of the billions upon billions of minute creatures that have
lived and died in this place.

The downward movement of surface water into the depths is an occurrence
as dramatic as upwelling, and perhaps it fills the human mind with an
even greater sense of awe and mystery, because it cannot be seen but can
only be imagined. At several known places the downward flow of enormous
quantities of water takes place regularly. This water feeds the deep
currents of whose courses we have only the dimmest knowledge. We do know
that it is all part of the ocean’s system of balances, by which she pays
back to one part of her waters what she had latterly borrowed for
distribution to another.

The North Atlantic, for example, receives quantities of surface water
(some 6 million cubic meters a second) from the South Atlantic via the
Equatorial Current. The return payment is made at deep levels, partly in
very cold arctic water, and partly in some of the saltiest, warmest
water in the world, that of the Mediterranean. There are two places for
the down-flow of arctic water. One is in the Labrador Sea. Another is
southeast of Greenland. At each the quantity of sinking water is
prodigious—some 2 million cubic meters a second. The deep Mediterranean
water flows out over the sill that separates the basin of the
Mediterranean from the open Atlantic. This sill lies about 150 fathoms
beneath the surface of the sea. The water that spills over its rocky
edge does so because of the unusual conditions that prevail in the
Mediterranean. The hot sun beating down on its nearly enclosed water
creates an extraordinarily high rate of evaporation, drawing off into
the atmosphere more water than is added by the inflow of rivers. The
water becomes ever saltier and more dense; as evaporation continues the
surface of the Mediterranean falls below that of the Atlantic. To
correct the inequality, lighter water from the Atlantic pours past
Gibraltar in surface streams of great strength.

Now we give the matter little thought, but in the days of sail, passage
out into the Atlantic was a difficult problem because of this surface
current. An old ship’s log of the year 1855 has this to say of the
current and its practical effect:

    Weather fine; made 1¼ pt. leeway. At noon, stood in to Almira
    Bay, and anchored off the village of Roguetas. Found a great
    number of vessels waiting for a chance to get to the westward,
    and learned from them that at least a thousand sail are
    weather-bound between this and Gibraltar. Some of them have been
    so for six weeks, and have even got so far as Malaga, only to be
    swept back by the current. Indeed, no vessel has been able to
    get out into the Atlantic for three months past.

Later measurements show that these surface currents flow into the
Mediterranean with an average velocity of about three knots. The bottom
current, moving out into the Atlantic, is even stronger. Its outward
flow is so vigorous that it has been known to wreck oceanographic
instruments sent down to measure it, apparently pounding them against
stones on the bottom; and once the wire of the Falmouth cable near
Gibraltar ‘was ground like the edge of a razor, so that it had to be
abandoned and a new one laid well inshore.’

The water that sinks in the arctic regions of the Atlantic, as well as
that spilling over the Gibraltar sill, spreads out widely into the
deeper parts of the ocean basins. Traversing the North Atlantic, it
crosses the equator and continues to the south, there passing between
two layers of water that are moving northward from the Antarctic Sea.
Some of this antarctic water mingles with the Atlantic water—that from
Greenland and Labrador and the Mediterranean—and with it returns south.
But other antarctic water moves northward across the equator and has
been traced as far as the latitude of Cape Hatteras.

The flow of these deep waters is hardly a ‘flow’ at all; its pace is
ponderously slow, the measured creep of icy, heavy water. But the
volumes involved are prodigious, and the areas covered worldwide. It may
even be that the deep ocean water, on such global wanderings, acts to
distribute some of the marine fauna—not the surface forms but the
dwellers in deep, dark layers. From our knowledge of the source of the
currents, it seems significant that some of the same species of
deep-water invertebrates and fishes have been collected off the coast of
South Africa and off Greenland. And about Bermuda, where a greater
variety of deep-water forms has been found than anywhere else, there is
a mingling of deep water from the Antarctic, the Arctic, and the
Mediterranean. Perhaps in these sunless streams the weird inhabitants of
deep waters drift, generation after generation, surviving and
multiplying because of the almost changeless character of these slowly
moving currents.

There is, then, no water that is wholly of the Pacific, or wholly of the
Atlantic, or of the Indian or the Antarctic. The surf that we find
exhilarating at Virginia Beach or at La Jolla today may have lapped at
the base of antarctic icebergs or sparkled in the Mediterranean sun,
years ago, before it moved through dark and unseen waterways to the
place we find it now. It is by the deep, hidden currents that the oceans
are made one.




[Illustration: Course of the great, wind-driven current systems of the
Atlantic and Pacific oceans.]



[Illustration: Cold currents appear in white; warm or intermediate ones
in black.]




                           _The Moving Tides_


               IN EVERY COUNTRY THE MOON KEEPS EVER THE RULE OF ALLIANCE
                     WITH THE SEA WHICH IT ONCE FOR ALL HAS AGREED UPON.
                                                     —THE VENERABLE BEDE

THERE is no drop of water in the ocean, not even in the deepest parts of
the abyss, that does not know and respond to the mysterious forces that
create the tide. No other force that affects the sea is so strong.
Compared with the tide the wind-created waves are surface movements
felt, at most, no more than a hundred fathoms below the surface. So,
despite their impressive sweep, are the planetary currents, which seldom
involve more than the upper several hundred fathoms. The masses of water
affected by the tidal movement are enormous, as will be clear from one
example. Into one small bay on the east coast of North
America—Passamaquoddy—2 billion tons of water are carried by the tidal
currents twice each day; into the whole Bay of Fundy, 100 billion tons.

Here and there we find dramatic illustration of the fact that the tides
affect the whole ocean, from its surface to its floor. The meeting of
opposing tidal currents in the Strait of Messina creates whirlpools (one
of them is Charybdis of classical fame) which so deeply stir the waters
of the strait that fish bearing all the marks of abyssal existence,
their eyes atrophied or abnormally large, their bodies studded with
phosphorescent organs, frequently are cast up on the lighthouse beach,
and the whole area yields a rich collection of deep-sea fauna for the
Institute of Marine Biology at Messina.

The tides are a response of the mobile waters of the ocean to the pull
of the moon and the more distant sun. In theory, there is a
gravitational attraction between every drop of sea water and even the
outermost star of the universe. In practice, however, the pull of the
remote stars is so slight as to be obliterated in the vaster movements
by which the ocean yields to the moon and the sun. Anyone who has lived
near tidewater knows that the moon, far more than the sun, controls the
tides. He has noticed that, just as the moon rises later each day by
fifty minutes, on the average, than the day before, so, in most places,
the time of high tide is correspondingly later each day. And as the moon
waxes and wanes in its monthly cycle, so the height of the tide varies.
Twice each month, when the moon is a mere thread of silver in the sky,
and again when it is full, we have the strongest tidal movements—the
highest flood tides and the lowest ebb tides of the lunar month. These
are called the spring tides. At these times sun, moon, and earth are
directly in line and the pull of the two heavenly bodies is added
together to bring the water high on the beaches, and send its surf
leaping upward against the sea cliffs, and draw a brimming tide into the
harbors so that the boats float high beside their wharfs. And twice each
month, at the quarters of the moon, when sun, moon, and earth lie at the
apexes of a triangle, and the pull of sun and moon are opposed, we have
the moderate tidal movements called the neap tides. Then the difference
between high and lower water is less than at any other time during the
month.

That the sun, with a mass 27 million times that of the moon, should have
less influence over the tides than a small satellite of the earth is at
first surprising. But in the mechanics of the universe, nearness counts
for more than distant mass, and when all the mathematical calculations
have been made we find that the moon’s power over the tides is more than
twice that of the sun.

The tides are enormously more complicated than all this would suggest.
The influence of sun and moon is constantly changing, varying with the
phases of the moon, with the distance of moon and sun from the earth,
and with the position of each to north or south of the equator. They are
complicated further by the fact that every body of water, whether
natural or artificial, has its own period of oscillation. Disturb its
waters and they will move with a seesaw or rocking motion, with the most
pronounced movement at the ends of the container, the least motion at
the center. Tidal scientists now believe that the ocean contains a
number of ‘basins,’ each with its own period of oscillation determined
by its length and depth. The disturbance that sets the water in motion
is the attracting force of the moon and sun. But the kind of motion,
that is, the period of the swing of the water, depends upon the physical
dimensions of the basin. What this means in terms of actual tides we
shall presently see.

The tides present a striking paradox, and the essence of it is this: the
force that sets them in motion is cosmic, lying wholly outside the earth
and presumably acting impartially on all parts of the globe, but the
nature of the tide at any particular place is a local matter, with
astonishing differences occurring within a very short geographic
distance. When we spend a long summer holiday at the seashore we may
become aware that the tide in our cove behaves very differently from
that at a friend’s place twenty miles up the coast, and is strikingly
different from what we may have known in some other locality. If we are
summering on Nantucket Island our boating and swimming will be little
disturbed by the tides, for the range between high water and low is only
about a foot or two. But if we choose to vacation near the upper part of
the Bay of Fundy, we must accommodate ourselves to a rise and fall of 40
to 50 feet, although both places are included within the same body of
water—the Gulf of Maine. Or if we spend our holiday on Chesapeake Bay
we may find that the time of high water each day varies by as much as 12
hours in different places on the shores of the same bay.

The truth of the matter is that local topography is all-important in
determining the features that to our minds make ‘the tide.’ The
attractive force of the heavenly bodies sets the water in motion, but
how, and how far, and how strongly it will rise depend on such things as
the slope of the bottom, the depth of a channel, or the width of a bay’s
entrance.

The United States Coast and Geodetic Survey has a remarkable, robotlike
machine with which it can predict the time and height of the tide on any
past or future date, for any part of the world, on one essential
condition. This is that at some time local observations must have been
made to show how the topographic features of the place modify and direct
the tidal movements.

Perhaps the most striking differences are in the range of tide, which
varies tremendously in different parts of the world, so that what the
inhabitants of one place might consider disastrously high water might be
regarded as no tide at all by coastal communities only a hundred miles
distant. The highest tides in the world occur in the Bay of Fundy, with
a rise of about 50 feet in Minas Basin near the head of the Bay at the
spring tides. At least half a dozen other places scattered around the
world have a tidal range of more than 30 feet—Puerto Gallegos in
Argentina and Cook Inlet in Alaska, Frobisher Bay in Davis Strait, the
Koksoak River emptying into Hudson Strait, and the Bay of St. Malo in
France come to mind. At many other places ‘high tide’ may mean a rise of
only a foot or so, perhaps only a few inches. The tides of Tahiti rise
and fall in a gentle movement, with a difference of no more than a foot
between high water and low. On most oceanic islands the range of the
tide is slight. But it is never safe to generalize about the kinds of
places that have high or low tides, because two areas that are not far
apart may respond in very different ways to the tide-producing forces.
At the Atlantic end of the Panama Canal the tidal range is not more than
1 or 2 feet, but at the Pacific end, only 40 miles away, the range is 12
to 16 feet. The Sea of Okhotsk is another example of the way the height
of the tide varies. Throughout much of the Sea the tides are
moderate—only about 2 feet—but in some parts of the Sea there is a
10-foot rise, and at the head of one of its arms—the Gulf of
Penjinsk—the rise is 37 feet.

What is it about one place that will bring 40 or 50 feet of water rising
about its shores, while at another place lying under the same moon and
sun, the tide will rise only a few inches? What, for example, can be the
explanation of the great tides on the Bay of Fundy, while only a few
hundred miles away at Nantucket Island, on the shores of the same ocean,
the tide range is little more than a foot?

The modern theory of tidal oscillation seems to offer the best
explanation of such local differences—the rocking up and down of water
in each natural basin about a central, virtually tideless node.
Nantucket is located near the node of its basin, where there is little
motion, hence a small tide range. Passing northeastward along the shores
of this basin, we find the tides becoming progressively higher, with a
6-foot range at Nauset Harbor on Cape Cod, 8.9 feet at Gloucester, 15.7
feet at West Quoddy Head, 20.9 feet at St. John, and 39.4 feet at Folly
Point. The Nova Scotia shore of the Bay of Fundy has somewhat higher
tides than the corresponding points on the New Brunswick shore, and the
highest tides of all are in Minas Basin at the head of the Bay. The
immense movements of water in the Bay of Fundy result from a combination
of circumstances. The bay lies at the end of an oscillating basin.
Furthermore, the natural period of oscillation of the basin is
approximately 12 hours. This very nearly coincides with the period of
the ocean tide. Therefore the water movement within the bay is sustained
and enormously increased by the ocean tide. The narrowing and shallowing
of the bay in its upper reaches, compelling the huge masses of water to
crowd into a constantly diminishing area, also contribute to the great
heights of the Fundy tides.

The tidal rhythms, as well as the range of tide, vary from ocean to
ocean. Flood tide and ebb succeed each other around the world, as night
follows day, but as to whether there shall be two high tides and two low
in each lunar day, or only one, there is no unvarying rule. To those who
know best the Atlantic Ocean—either its eastern or western shores—the
rhythm of two high tides and two low tides in each day seems ‘normal.’
Here, on each flood tide, the water advances about as far as the
preceding high; and succeeding ebb tides fall about equally low. But in
that great inland sea of the Atlantic, the Gulf of Mexico, a different
rhythm prevails around most of its borders. At best the tidal rise here
is but a slight movement, of no more than a foot or two. At certain
places on the shores of the Gulf it is a long, deliberate
undulation—one rise and one fall in the lunar day of 24 hours plus 50
minutes—resembling the untroubled breathing of that earth monster to
whom the ancients attributed all tides. This ‘diurnal rhythm’ is found
in scattered places about the earth—such as at Saint Michael, Alaska,
and at Do Son in French Indo-China—as well as in the Gulf of Mexico. By
far the greater part of the world’s coasts—most of the Pacific basin
and the shores of the Indian Ocean—display a mixture of the diurnal and
semidiurnal types of tide. There are two high and two low tides in a
day, but the succeeding floods may be so unequal that the second
scarcely rises to mean sea level; or it may be the ebb tides that are of
extreme inequality.

There seems to be no simple explanation of why some parts of the ocean
should respond to the pull of sun and moon with one rhythm and other
parts with another, although the matter is perfectly clear to tidal
scientists on the basis of mathematical calculations. To gain some
inkling of the reasons, we must recall the many separate components of
the tide-producing force, which in turn result from the changing
relative positions of sun, moon, and earth. Depending on local
geographic features, every part of earth and sea, while affected in some
degree by each component, is more responsive to some than to others.
Presumably the shape and depths of the Atlantic basin cause it to
respond most strongly to the forces that produce a semidiurnal rhythm.
The Pacific and Indian oceans, on the other hand, are affected by both
the diurnal and semidiurnal forces, and a mixed tide results.

The island of Tahiti is a classic example of the way even a small area
may react to one of the tide-producing forces to the virtual exclusion
of the others. On Tahiti, it is sometimes said, you can tell the time of
day by looking out at the beach and noticing the stage of the tide. This
is not strictly true, but the legend has a certain basis. With slight
variations, high tide occurs at noon and at midnight; low water, at six
o’clock morning and evening. The tides thus ignore the effect of the
moon, which is to advance the time of the tides by 50 minutes each day.
Why should the tides of Tahiti follow the sun instead of the moon? The
most favored explanation is that the island lies at the axis or node of
one of the basins set in oscillation by the moon. There is very little
motion in response to the moon at this point, and the waters are
therefore free to move in the rhythm induced by the sun.

If the history of the earth’s tides should one day be written by some
observer of the universe, it would no doubt be said that they reached
their greatest grandeur and power in the younger days of Earth, and that
they slowly grew feebler and less imposing until one day they ceased to
be. For the tides were not always as they are today, and as with all
that is earthly, their days are numbered.

In the days when the earth was young, the coming in of the tide must
have been a stupendous event. If the moon was, as we have supposed in an
earlier chapter, formed by the tearing away of a part of the outer crust
of the earth, it must have remained for a time very close to its parent.
Its present position is the consequence of being pushed farther and
farther away from the earth for some 2 billion years. When it was half
its present distance from the earth, its power over the ocean tides was
eight times as great as now, and the tidal range may even then have been
several hundred feet on certain shores. But when the earth was only a
few million years old, assuming that the deep ocean basins were then
formed, the sweep of the tides must have been beyond all comprehension.
Twice each day, the fury of the incoming waters would inundate all the
margins of the continents. The range of the surf must have been
enormously extended by the reach of the tides, so that the waves would
batter the crests of high cliffs and sweep inland to erode the
continents. The fury of such tides would contribute not a little to the
general bleakness and grimness and uninhabitability of the young earth.

Under such conditions, no living thing could exist on the shores or pass
beyond them, and, had conditions not changed, it is reasonable to
suppose that life would have evolved no further than the fishes. But
over the millions of years the moon has receded, driven away by the
friction of the tides it creates. The very movement of the water over
the bed of the ocean, over the shallow edges of the continents, and over
the inland seas carries within itself the power that is slowly
destroying the tides, for tidal friction is gradually slowing down the
rotation of the earth. In those early days we have spoken of, it took
the earth a much shorter time—perhaps only about 4 hours—to make a
complete rotation on its axis. Since then, the spinning of the globe has
been so greatly slowed that a rotation now requires, as everyone knows,
about 24 hours. This retarding will continue, according to
mathematicians, until the day is about 50 times as long as it is now.

And all the while the tidal friction will be exerting a second effect,
pushing the moon farther away, just as it has already pushed it out more
than 200,000 miles. (According to the laws of mechanics, as the rotation
of the earth is retarded, that of the moon must be accelerated, and
centrifugal force will carry it farther away.) As the moon recedes, it
will, of course, have less power over the tides and they will grow
weaker. It will also take the moon longer to complete its orbit around
the earth. When finally the length of the day and of the month coincide,
the moon will no longer rotate relatively to the earth, and there will
be no lunar tides.

All this, of course, will require time on a scale the mind finds it
difficult to conceive, and before it happens it is quite probable that
the human race will have vanished from the earth. This may seem, then,
like a Wellsian fantasy of a world so remote that we may dismiss it from
our thoughts. But already, even in our allotted fraction of earthly
time, we can see some of the effects of these cosmic processes. Our day
is believed to be several seconds longer than that of Babylonian times.
Britain’s Astronomer Royal recently called the attention of the American
Philosophical Society to the fact that the world will soon have to
choose between two kinds of time. The tide-induced lengthening of the
day has already complicated the problems of human systems of keeping
time. Conventional clocks, geared to the earth’s rotation, do not show
the effect of the lengthening days. New atomic clocks now being
constructed will show actual time and will differ from other clocks.

Although the tides have become tamer, and their range is now measured in
tens instead of hundreds of feet, mariners are nevertheless greatly
concerned not only with the stages of the tide and the set of the tidal
currents, but with the many violent movements and disturbances of the
sea that are indirectly related to the tides. Nothing the human mind has
invented can tame a tide rip or control the rhythm of the water’s ebb
and flow, and the most modern instruments cannot carry a vessel over a
shoal until the tide has brought a sufficient depth of water over it.
Even the _Queen Mary_ waits for slack water to come to her pier in New
York; otherwise the set of the tidal current might swing her against the
pier with enough force to crush it. On the Bay of Fundy, because of the
great range of tide, harbor activities in some of the ports follow a
pattern as rhythmic as the tides themselves, for vessels can come to the
docks to take on or discharge cargo during only a few hours on each
tide, leaving promptly to avoid being stranded in mud at low water.

In the confinement of narrow passages or when opposed by contrary winds
and swells, the tidal currents often move with uncontrollable violence,
creating some of the most dangerous waterways of the world. It is only
necessary to read the Coast Pilots and Sailing Directions for various
parts of the world to understand the menace of such tidal currents to
navigation.

‘Vessels around the Aleutians are in more danger from tidal currents
than from any other cause, save the lack of surveys,’ says the postwar
edition of the _Alaska Pilot_. Through Unalga and Akutan passes, which
are among the most-used routes for vessels entering Bering Sea from the
Pacific, strong tidal currents pour, making their force felt well
offshore and setting vessels unexpectedly against the rocks. Through
Akun Strait the flood tide has the velocity of a mountain torrent, with
dangerous swirls and overfalls. In each of these passes the tide will
raise heavy, choppy seas if opposed by wind or swells. ‘Vessels must be
prepared to take seas aboard,’ warns the _Pilot_, for a 15-foot wave of
a tide rip may suddenly rise and sweep across a vessel, and more than
one man has been carried off to his death in this way.

On the opposite side of the world, the tide setting eastward from the
open Atlantic presses between the islands of the Shetlands and Orkneys
into the North Sea, and on the ebb returns through the same narrow
passages. At certain stages of the tide these waters are dotted with
dangerous eddies, with strange upward domings, or with sinister pits or
depressions. Even in calm weather boats are warned to avoid the eddies
of Pentland Firth, which are known as the Swilkie; and with an ebb tide
and a northwest wind the heavy breaking seas of the Swilkie are a menace
to vessels ‘which few, having once experienced, would be rash enough to
encounter a second time.’

Edgar Allan Poe, in his ‘Descent into the Maelstrom,’ converted one of
the more evil manifestations of the tide into literature. Few who have
read the story will forget its drama—how the old man led his companion
to a mountain cliff high above the sea and let him watch the water far
below in the narrow passageway between the islands, with its sinister
foam and scum, its uneasy bubbling and boiling, until suddenly the
whirlpool was formed before his eyes and rushed with an appalling sound
through the narrow waterway. Then the old man told the story of his own
descent into the whirlpool and of his miraculous escape. Most of us have
wondered how much of the story was fact, how much the creation of Poe’s
fertile imagination. There actually is a Maelstrom and it exists where
Poe placed it, between two of the islands of the Lofoten group off the
west coast of Norway. It is, as he described it, a gigantic whirlpool or
series of whirlpools, and men with their boats have actually been drawn
down into these spinning funnels of water. Although Poe’s account
exaggerates certain details, the essential facts on which he based his
narrative are verified in the _Sailing Directions for the Northwest and
North Coasts of Norway_, a practical and circumstantial document:

    Though rumor has greatly exaggerated the importance of the
    Malström, or more properly Moskenstraumen, which runs between
    Mosken and Lofotodden, it is still the most dangerous tideway in
    Lofoten, its violence being due, in great measure, to the
    irregularity of the ground . . . As the strength of the tide
    increases the sea becomes heavier and the current more
    irregular, forming extensive eddies or whirlpools (Malström).
    During such periods no vessel should enter the Moskenstraumen.

    These whirlpools are cavities in the form of an inverted bell,
    wide and rounded at the mouth and narrower toward the bottom;
    they are largest when first formed and are carried along with
    the current, diminishing gradually until they disappear; before
    the extinction of one, two or three more will appear, following
    each other like so many pits in the sea . . . Fishermen affirm
    that if they are aware of their approach to a whirlpool and have
    time to throw an oar or any other bulky body into it they will
    get over it safely; the reason is that when the continuity is
    broken and the whirling motion of the sea interrupted by
    something thrown into it the water must rush suddenly in on all
    sides and fill up the cavity. For the same reason, in strong
    breezes, when the waves break, though there may be a whirling
    round, there can be no cavity. In the Saltström boats and men
    have been drawn down by these vortices, and much loss of life
    has resulted.

Among unusual creations of the tide, perhaps the best known are the
bores. The world possesses half a dozen or more famous ones. A bore is
created when a great part of the flood tide enters a river as a single
wave, or at most two or three waves, with a steep and high front. The
conditions that produce bores are several: there must be a considerable
range of tide, combined with sand bars or other obstructions in the
mouth of the river, so that the tide is hindered and held back, until it
finally gathers itself together and rushes through. The Amazon is
remarkable for the distance its bore travels upstream—some 200
miles—with the result that the bores of as many as 5 flood tides may
actually be moving up the river at one time.

On the Tsientang River, which empties into the China Sea, all shipping
is controlled by the bore—the largest, most dangerous, and best known
in the world. The ancient Chinese used to throw offerings into the river
to appease the angry spirit of this bore, whose size and fury appear to
have varied from century to century, or perhaps even from decade to
decade, as the silting of the estuary has shifted and changed. During
most of the month the bore now advances up the river in a wave 8 to 11
feet high, moving at a speed of 12 to 13 knots, its front ‘a sloping
cascade of bubbling foam, falling forward and pounding on itself and on
the river.’ Its full ferocity is reserved for the spring tides of the
full moon and the new moon, at which times the crest of the advancing
wave is said to rise 25 feet above the surface of the river.

There are bores, though none so spectacular, in North America. There is
one at Moncton, on New Brunswick’s Petitcodiac River, but it is
impressive only on the spring tides of the full or new moon. At
Turnagain Arm in Cook Inlet, Alaska, where the tides are high and the
currents strong, the flood tide under certain conditions comes in as a
bore. Its advancing front may be four to six feet high and is recognized
as being so dangerous to small craft that boats are beached well above
the level of the flats when the bore is approaching. It can be heard
about half an hour before its arrival at any point, traveling slowly
with a sound as of breakers on a beach.

The influence of the tide over the affairs of sea creatures as well as
men may be seen all over the world. The billions upon billions of
sessile animals, like oysters, mussels, and barnacles, owe their very
existence to the sweep of the tides, which brings them the food which
they are unable to go in search of. By marvelous adaptations of form and
structure, the inhabitants of the world between the tide lines are
enabled to live in a zone where the danger of being dried up is matched
against the danger of being washed away, where for every enemy that
comes by sea there is another that comes by land, and where the most
delicate of living tissues must somehow withstand the assault of storm
waves that have the power to shift tons of rock or to crack the hardest
granite.

The most curious and incredibly delicate adaptations, however, are the
ones by which the breeding rhythm of certain marine animals is timed to
coincide with the phases of the moon and the stages of the tide. In
Europe it has been well established that the spawning activities of
oysters reach their peak on the spring tides, which are about two days
after the full or the new moon. In the waters of northern Africa there
is a sea urchin that, on the nights when the moon is full and apparently
only then, releases its reproductive cells into the sea. And in tropical
waters in many parts of the world there are small marine worms whose
spawning behavior is so precisely adjusted to the tidal calendar that,
merely from observing them, one could tell the month, the day, and often
the time of day as well.

Near Samoa in the Pacific, the palolo worm lives out its life on the
bottom of the shallow sea, in holes in the rocks and among the masses of
corals. Twice each year, during the neap tides of the moon’s last
quarter in October and November, the worms forsake their burrows and
rise to the surface in swarms that cover the water. For this purpose,
each worm has literally broken its body in two, half to remain in its
rocky tunnel, half to carry the reproductive products to the surface and
there to liberate the cells. This happens at dawn on the day before the
moon reaches its last quarter, and again on the following day; on the
second day of the spawning the quantity of eggs liberated is so great
that the sea is discolored.

The Fijians, whose waters have a similar worm, call them ‘Mbalolo’ and
have designated the periods of their spawning ‘Mbalolo lailai’ (little)
for October and ‘Mbalolo levu’ (large) for November. Similar forms near
the Gilbert Islands respond to certain phases of the moon in June and
July; in the Malay Archipelago a related worm swarms at the surface on
the second and third nights after the full moon of March and April, when
the tides are running highest. A Japanese palolo swarms after the new
moon and again after the full moon in October and November.

Concerning each of these, the question recurs but remains unanswered: is
it the state of the tides that in some unknown way supplies the impulse
from which springs this behavior, or is it, even more mysteriously, some
other influence of the moon? It is easier to imagine that it is the
press and the rhythmic movement of the water that in some way brings
about this response. But why is it only certain tides of the year, and
why for some species is it the fullest tides of the month and for others
the least movements of the waters that are related to the perpetuation
of the race? At present, no one can answer.

No other creature displays so exquisite an adaptation to the tidal
rhythm as the grunion—a small, shimmering fish about as long as a man’s
hand. Through no one can say what processes of adaptation, extending
over no one knows how many millennia, the grunion has come to know not
only the daily rhythm of the tides, but the monthly cycle by which
certain tides sweep higher on the beaches than others. It has so adapted
its spawning habits to the tidal cycle that the very existence of the
race depends on the precision of this adjustment.

Shortly after the full moon of the months from March to August, the
grunion appear in the surf on the beaches of California. The tide
reaches flood stage, slackens, hesitates, and begins to ebb. Now on
these waves of the ebbing tide the fish begin to come in. Their bodies
shimmer in the light of the moon as they are borne up the beach on the
crest of a wave, they lie glittering on the wet sand for a perceptible
moment of time, then fling themselves into the wash of the next wave and
are carried back to sea. For about an hour after the turn of the tide
this continues, thousands upon thousands of grunion coming up onto the
beach, leaving the water, returning to it. This is the spawning act of
the species.

During the brief interval between successive waves, the male and female
have come together in the wet sand, the one to shed her eggs, the other
to fertilize them. When the parent fish return to the water, they have
left behind a mass of eggs buried in the sand. Succeeding waves on that
night do not wash out the eggs because the tide is already ebbing. The
waves of the next high tide will not reach them, because for a time
after the full of the moon each tide will halt its advance a little
lower on the beach than the preceding one. The eggs, then, will be
undisturbed for at least a fortnight. In the warm, damp, incubating sand
they undergo their development. Within two weeks the magic change from
fertilized egg to larval fishlet is completed, the perfectly formed
little grunion still confined within the membranes of the egg, still
buried in the sand, waiting for release. With the tides of the new moon
it comes. Their waves wash over the places where the little masses of
the grunion eggs were buried, the swirl and rush of the surf stirring
the sand deeply. As the sand is washed away, and the eggs feel the touch
of the cool sea water, the membranes rupture, the fishlets hatch, and
the waves that released them bear them away to the sea.

But the link between tide and living creature I like best to remember is
that of a very small worm, flat of body, with no distinction of
appearance, but with one unforgettable quality. The name of this worm is
_Convoluta roscoffensis_, and it lives on the sandy beaches of northern
Brittany and the Channel Islands. Convoluta has entered into a
remarkable partnership with a green alga, whose cells inhabit the body
of the worm and lend to its tissues their own green color. The worm
lives entirely on the starchy products manufactured by its plant guest,
having become so completely dependent upon this means of nutrition that
its digestive organs have degenerated. In order that the algal cells may
carry on their function of photosynthesis (which is dependent upon
sunlight) Convoluta rises from the damp sands of the intertidal zone as
soon as the tide has ebbed, the sand becoming spotted with large green
patches composed of thousands of the worms. For the several hours while
the tide is out, the worms lie thus in the sun, and the plants
manufacture their starches and sugars; but when the tide returns, the
worms must again sink into the sand to avoid being washed away, out into
deep water. So the whole lifetime of the worm is a succession of
movements conditioned by the stages of the tide—upward into sunshine on
the ebb, downward on the flood.

What I find most unforgettable about Convoluta is this: sometimes it
happens that a marine biologist, wishing to study some related problem,
will transfer a whole colony of the worms into the laboratory, there to
establish them in an aquarium, where there are no tides. But twice each
day Convoluta rises out of the sand on the bottom of the aquarium, into
the light of the sun. And twice each day it sinks again into the sand.
Without a brain, or what we would call a memory, or even any very clear
perception, Convoluta continues to live out its life in this alien
place, remembering, in every fiber of its small green body, the tidal
rhythm of the distant sea.




                                      III


                                      MAN
                                      AND
                                      THE
                                      SEA
                                    ABOUT
                                      HIM






                        _The Global Thermostat_


                       OUT OF THE CHAMBER OF THE SOUTH COMETH THE STORM,
                                              AND COLD OUT OF THE NORTH.
                                                        —THE BOOK OF JOB

WHEN the building of the Panama Canal was first suggested, the project
was severely criticized in Europe. The French, especially, complained
that such a canal would allow the waters of the Equatorial Current to
escape into the Pacific, that there would then be no Gulf Stream, and
that the winter climate of Europe would become unbearably frigid. The
alarmed Frenchmen were completely wrong in their forecast of
oceanographic events, but they were right in their recognition of a
general principle—the close relation between climate and the pattern of
ocean circulation.

There are recurrent schemes for deliberately changing—or attempting to
change—the pattern of the currents and so modifying climate at will. We
hear of projects for diverting the cold Oyashio from the Asiatic coast,
and of others for controlling the Gulf Stream. About 1912 the Congress
of the United States was asked to appropriate money to build a jetty
from Cape Race eastward across the Grand Banks to obstruct the cold
water flowing south from the Arctic. Advocates of the plan believed that
the Gulf Stream would then swing in nearer the mainland of the northern
United States and would presumably bring us warmer winters. The
appropriation was not granted. Even if the money had been provided,
there is little reason to suppose that engineers then—or later—could
have succeeded in controlling the sweep of the ocean’s currents. And
fortunately so, for most of these plans would have effects different
from those popularly expected. Bringing the Gulf Stream closer to the
American east coast, for example, would make our winters worse instead
of better. Along the Atlantic coast of North America, the prevailing
winds blow eastward, across the land toward the sea. The air masses that
have lain over the Gulf Stream seldom reach us. But the Stream, with its
mass of warm water, does have something to do with bringing our weather
to us. The cold winds of winter are pushed by gravity toward the
low-pressure areas over the warm water. The winter of 1916, when Stream
temperatures were above normal, was long remembered for its cold and
snowy weather along the east coast. If we could move the Stream inshore,
the result in winter would be colder, stronger winds from the interior
of the continent—not milder weather.

But if the eastern North American climate is not dominated by the Gulf
Stream, it is far otherwise for the lands lying ‘downstream.’ From the
Newfoundland Banks, as we have seen, the warm water of the Stream drifts
eastward, pushed along by the prevailing westerly winds. Almost
immediately, however, it divides into several branches. One flows north
to the western shore of Greenland; there the warm water attacks the ice
brought around Cape Farewell by the East Greenland Current. Another
passes to the southwest coast of Iceland and, before losing itself in
arctic waters, brings a gentling influence to the southern shores of
that island. But the main branch of the Gulf Stream or North Atlantic
Drift flows eastward. Soon it divides again. The southernmost of these
branches turns toward Spain and Africa and re-enters the Equatorial
Current. The northernmost branch, hurried eastward by the winds blowing
around the Icelandic ‘low,’ piles up against the coast of Europe the
warmest water found at comparable latitudes anywhere in the world. From
the Bay of Biscay north its influence is felt. And as the current rolls
northeastward along the Scandinavian coast, it sends off many lateral
branches that curve back westward to bring the breath of warm water to
the arctic islands and to mingle with other currents in intricate whirls
and eddies. The west coast of Spitsbergen, warmed by one of these
lateral streams, is bright with flowers in the arctic summer; the east
coast, with its polar current, remains barren and forbidding. Passing
around the North Cape, the warm currents keep open such harbors as
Hammerfest and Murmansk, although Riga, 800 miles farther south on the
shores of the Baltic, is choked with ice. Somewhere in the Arctic Sea,
near the island of Novaya Zemlya, the last traces of Atlantic water
disappear, losing themselves at last in the overwhelming sweep of the
icy northern sea.

It is always a warm water current, but the temperature of the Gulf
Stream nevertheless varies from year to year, and a seemingly slight
change profoundly affects the air temperatures of Europe. The British
meteorologist, C. E. P. Brooks, compares the North Atlantic to ‘a great
bath, with a hot tap and two cold taps.’ The hot tap is the Gulf Stream;
the cold taps are the East Greenland Current and the Labrador Current.
Both the volume and the temperature of the hot-water tap vary. The cold
taps are nearly constant in temperature but vary immensely in volume.
The adjustment of the three taps determines surface temperatures in the
eastern Atlantic and has a great deal to do with the weather of Europe
and with happenings in arctic seas. A very slight winter warming of the
eastern Atlantic temperatures means, for example, that the snow cover of
northwestern Europe will melt earlier, that there will be an earlier
thawing of the ground, that spring plowing may begin earlier, and that
the harvest will be better. It means, too, that there will be relatively
little ice near Iceland in the spring and that the amount of drift ice
in the Barents Sea will diminish a year or two later. These relations
have been clearly established by European scientists. Some day
long-range weather forecasts for the continent of Europe will probably
be based in part on ocean temperatures. But at present there are no
means for collecting the temperatures over a large enough area, at
frequent enough intervals.[16]

For the globe as a whole, the ocean is the great regulator, the great
stabilizer of temperatures. It has been described as ‘a savings bank for
solar energy, receiving deposits in seasons of excessive insolation and
paying them back in seasons of want.’ Without the ocean, our world would
be visited by unthinkably harsh extremes of temperature. For the water
that covers three-fourths of the earth’s surface with an enveloping
mantle is a substance of remarkable qualities. It is an excellent
absorber and radiator of heat. Because of its enormous heat capacity,
the ocean can absorb a great deal of heat from the sun without becoming
what we would consider ‘hot,’ or it can lose much of its heat without
becoming ‘cold.’

Through the agency of ocean currents, heat and cold may be distributed
over thousands of miles. It is possible to follow the course of a mass
of warm water that originates in the trade wind belt of the Southern
Hemisphere and remains recognizable for a year and a half, through a
course of more than 7000 miles. This redistributing function of the
ocean tends to make up for the uneven heating of the globe by the sun.
As it is, ocean currents carry hot equatorial water toward the poles and
return cold water equator-ward by such surface drifts as the Labrador
Current and Oyashio, and even more importantly by deep currents. The
redistribution of heat for the whole earth is accomplished about half by
the ocean currents, and half by the winds.

At that thin interface between the ocean of water and the ocean of
overlying air, lying as they do in direct contact over by far the
greater part of the earth, there are continuous interactions of
tremendous importance.

The atmosphere warms or cools the ocean. It receives vapors through
evaporation, leaving most of the salts in the sea and so increasing the
salinity of the water. With the changing weight of that whole mass of
air that envelops the earth, the atmosphere brings variable pressure to
bear on the surface of the sea, which is depressed under areas of high
pressure and springs up in compensation under the atmospheric lows. With
the moving force of the winds, the air grips the surface of the ocean
and raises it into waves, drives the currents onward, lowers sea levels
on windward shores, and raises it on lee shores.

But even more does the ocean dominate the air. Its effect on the
temperature and humidity of the atmosphere is far greater than the small
transfer of heat from air to sea. It takes 3000 times as much heat to
warm a given volume of water 1° as to warm an equal volume of air by the
same amount. The heat lost by a cubic meter of water on cooling 1° C.
would raise the temperature of 3000 cubic meters of air by the same
amount. Or to use another example, a layer of water a meter deep, on
cooling 0.1° could warm a layer of air 33 meters thick by 10°. The
temperature of the air is intimately related to atmospheric pressure.
Where the air is cold, pressure tends to be high; warm air favors low
pressures. The transfer of heat between ocean and air therefore alters
the belts of high and low pressure; this profoundly affects the
direction and strength of the winds and directs the storms on their
paths.

There are six more or less permanent centers of high pressure over the
oceans, three in each hemisphere. Not only do these areas play a
controlling part in the climate of surrounding lands, but they affect
the whole world because they are the birthplaces of most of the dominant
winds of the globe. The trade winds originate in high-pressure belts of
the Northern and Southern hemispheres. Over all the vast extent of ocean
across which they blow, these great winds retain their identity; it is
only over the continents that they become interrupted, confused, and
modified.

In other ocean areas there are belts of low pressure, which develop,
especially in winter, over waters that are then warmer than the
surrounding lands. Traveling barometric depressions or cyclonic storms
are attracted by these areas; they move rapidly across them or skirt
around their edges. So winter storms take a path across the Icelandic
‘low’ and over the Shetlands and Orkneys into the North Sea and the
Norwegian Sea; other storms are directed by still other low-pressure
areas over the Skagerrak and the Baltic into the interior of Europe.
Perhaps more than any other condition, the low-pressure area over the
warm water south of Iceland dominates the winter climate of Europe.

And most of the rains that fall on sea and land alike were raised from
the sea. They are carried as vapor in the winds, and then with change of
temperature the rains fall. Most of the European rain comes from
evaporation of Atlantic water. In the United States, vapor and warm air
from the Gulf of Mexico and the tropical waters of the western Atlantic
ride the winds up the wide valley of the Mississippi and provide rains
for much of the eastern part of North America.

Whether any place will know the harsh extremes of a continental climate
or the moderating effect of the sea depends less on its nearness to the
ocean than on the pattern of currents and winds and the relief of the
continents. The east coast of North America receives little benefit from
the sea, because the prevailing winds are from the west. The Pacific
coast, on the other hand, lies in the path of the westerly winds that
have blown across thousands of miles of ocean. The moist breath of the
Pacific brings climatic mildness and creates the dense rain forests of
British Columbia, Washington, and Oregon; but its full influence is
largely restricted to a narrow strip by the coast ranges that follow a
course parallel to the sea. Europe, in contrast, is wide open to the
sea, and ‘Atlantic weather’ carries hundreds of miles into the interior.

By a seeming paradox, there are parts of the world that owe their desert
dryness to their nearness to the ocean. The aridity of the Atacama and
Kalahari deserts is curiously related to the sea. Wherever such marine
deserts occur, there is found this combination of circumstances: a
western coast in the path of the prevailing winds, and a cold coastwise
current. So on the west coast of South America the cold Humboldt streams
northward off the shores of Chile and Peru—the great return flow of
Pacific waters seeking the equator. The Humboldt, it will be remembered,
is cold because it is continuously being reinforced by the upwelling of
deeper water. The presence of this cold water offshore helps create the
aridity of the region. The onshore breezes that push in toward the hot
land in the afternoons are formed of cool air that has lain over a cool
sea. As they reach the land they are forced to rise into the high
coastal mountains—the ascent cooling them more than the land can warm
them. So there is little condensation of water vapor, and although the
cloud banks and the fogs forever seem to promise rain, the promise is
not fulfilled so long as the Humboldt rolls on its accustomed course
along these shores. On the stretch from Arica to Caldera there is
normally less than an inch of rain in a year. It is a beautifully
balanced system—as long as it remains in balance. What happens when the
Humboldt is temporarily displaced is nothing short of catastrophic.

At irregular intervals the Humboldt is deflected away from the South
American continent by a warm current of tropical water that comes down
from the north. These are years of disaster. The whole economy of the
area is adjusted to the normal aridity of climate. In the years of El
Niño, as the warm current is called, torrential rains fall—the
downpouring rains of the equatorial regions let loose upon the dust-dry
hillsides of the Peruvian coast. The soil washes away, the mud huts
literally dissolve and collapse, crops are destroyed. Even worse things
happen at sea. The cold-water fauna of the Humboldt sickens and dies in
the warm water, and the birds that fish the cold sea for a living must
either migrate or starve.

Those parts of the coast of Africa that are bathed by the cool Benguela
Current also lie between mountains and sea. The easterly winds are dry,
descending winds, and the cool breezes from the sea have their moisture
capacity increased by contact with the hot land. Mists form over the
cold waters and roll in over the coast, but in a whole year the rainfall
is the meagerest token. The mean rainfall at Swakopmund in Walvis Bay is
0.7 inches a year. But again this is true only as long as the Benguela
holds sway along the coast, for there are times when the cold stream
falters as does the Humboldt, and here also these are years of disaster.

The transforming influence of the sea is portrayed with beautiful
clarity in the striking differences between the Arctic and Antarctic
regions. As everyone knows, the Arctic is a nearly landlocked sea; the
Antarctic, a continent surrounded by ocean. Whether this global
balancing of a land pole against a water pole has a deep significance in
the physics of the earth is uncertain; but the bearing of the fact on
the climates of the two regions is plainly evident.

The ice-covered Antarctic continent, bathed by seas of uniform coldness,
is in the grip of the polar anticyclone. High winds blow from the land
and repel any warming influence that might seek to penetrate it. The
mean temperature of this bitter world is never above the freezing point.
On exposed rocks the lichens grow, covering the barrenness of cliffs
with their gray or orange growths, and here and there over the snow is
the red dust of the hardier algae. Mosses hide in the valleys and
crevices less exposed to the winds, but of the higher plants only a few
impoverished stands of grasses have managed to invade this land. There
are no land mammals; the fauna of the Antarctic continent consists only
of birds, wingless mosquitoes, a few flies, and microscopic mites.

In sharp contrast are the arctic summers, where the tundra is bright
with many-colored flowers. Everywhere except on the Greenland icecap and
some of the arctic islands, summer temperatures are high enough for the
growth of plants, packing a year’s development into the short, warm,
arctic summer. The polar limit of plant growth is set not by latitude,
but by the sea. For the influence of the warm Atlantic penetrates
strongly within the Arctic Sea, entering, as we have seen, through the
one large break in the land girdle, the Greenland Sea. But the streams
of warm Atlantic water that enter the icy northern seas bring the
gentling touch that makes the Arctic, in climate as well as in
geography, a world apart from the Antarctic.

So, day by day and season by season, the ocean dominates the world’s
climate. Can it also be an agent in bringing about the long-period
swings of climatic change that we know have occurred throughout the long
history of the earth—the alternating periods of heat and cold, of
drought and flood? There is a fascinating theory that it can. This
theory links events in the deep, hidden places of the ocean with the
cyclic changes of climate and their effects on human history. It was
developed by the distinguished Swedish oceanographer, Otto Pettersson,
whose almost century-long life closed in 1941. In many papers,
Pettersson presented the different facets of his theory as he pieced it
together, bit by bit. Many of his fellow scientists were impressed,
others doubted. In those days few men could conceive of the dynamics of
water movements in the deep sea. Now the theory is being re-examined in
the light of modern oceanography and meteorology, and only recently C.
E. P. Brooks said, ‘It seems that there is good support for Pettersson’s
theory as well as for that of solar activity, and that the actual
variations of climate since about 3000 B.C. may have been to a large
extent the result of these two agents.’

To review the Pettersson theory is to review also a pageant of human
history, of men and nations in the control of elemental forces whose
nature they never understood and whose very existence they never
recognized. Pettersson’s work was perhaps a natural outcome of the
circumstances of his life. He was born—as he died 93 years later—on
the shores of the Baltic, a sea of complex and wonderful hydrography. In
his laboratory atop a sheer cliff overlooking the deep waters of the
Gulmarfiord, instruments recorded strange phenomena in the depths of
this gateway to the Baltic. As the ocean water presses in toward that
inland sea it dips down and lets the fresh surface water roll out above
it; and at that deep level where salt and fresh water come into contact
there is a sharp layer of discontinuity, like the surface film between
water and air. Each day Pettersson’s instruments revealed a strong,
pulsing movement of that deep layer—the pressing inward of great
submarine waves, of moving mountains of water. The movement was
strongest every twelfth hour of the day, and between the 12-hour
intervals it subsided. Pettersson soon established a link between these
submarine waves and the daily tides. ‘Moon waves,’ he called them, and
as he measured their height and timed their pulsing beat through the
months and years, their relation to the ever-changing cycles of the
tides became crystal clear.

Some of these deep waves of the Gulmarfiord were giants nearly 100 feet
high. Pettersson believed they were formed by the impact of the oceanic
tide wave on the submarine ridges of the North Atlantic, as though the
waters moving to the pull of the sun and moon, far down in the lower
levels of the sea, broke and spilled over in mountains of highly saline
water to enter the fiords and sounds of the coast.

From the submarine tide waves, Pettersson’s mind moved logically to
another problem—the changing fortunes of the Swedish herring fishery.
His native Bohuslan had been the site of the great Hanseatic herring
fisheries of the Middle Ages. All through the thirteenth, fourteenth,
and fifteenth centuries this great sea fishery was pursued in the Sund
and the Belts, the narrow passageways into the Baltic. The towns of
Skanor and Falsterbo knew unheard-of prosperity, for there seemed no end
of the silvery, wealth-bringing fish. Then suddenly the fishery ceased,
for the herring withdrew into the North Sea and came no more into the
gateways of the Baltic—this to the enrichment of Holland and the
impoverishment of Sweden. Why did the herring cease to come? Pettersson
thought he knew, and the reason was intimately related to that moving
pen in his laboratory, the pen that traced on a revolving drum the
movements of the submarine waves far down in the depths of Gulmarfiord.

He had found that the submarine waves varied in height and power as the
tide-producing power of the moon and sun varied. From astronomical
calculations he learned that the tides must have been at their greatest
strength during the closing centuries of the Middle Ages—those
centuries when the Baltic herring fishery was flourishing. Then sun,
moon, and earth came into such a position at the time of the winter
solstice that they exerted the greatest possible attracting force upon
the sea. Only about every eighteen centuries do the heavenly bodies
assume this particular relation. But in that period of the Middle Ages,
the great underwater waves pressed with unusual force into the narrow
passages to the Baltic, and with the ‘water mountains’ went the herring
shoals. Later, when the tides became weaker, the herring remained
outside the Baltic, in the North Sea.

Then Pettersson realized another fact of extreme significance—that
those centuries of great tides had been a period of ‘startling and
unusual occurrences’ in the world of nature. Polar ice blocked much of
the North Atlantic. The coasts of the North Sea and the Baltic were laid
waste by violent storm floods. The winters were of ‘unexplained
severity’ and in consequence of the climatic rigors political and
economic catastrophes occurred all over the populated regions of the
earth. Could there be a connection between these events and those moving
mountains of unseen water? Could the deep tides affect the lives of men
as well as of herring?

From this germ of an idea, Pettersson’s fertile mind evolved a theory of
climatic variation, which he set forth in 1912 in an extraordinarily
interesting document called _Climatic Variations in Historic and
Prehistoric Time_.[L] Marshalling scientific, historic, and literary
evidence, he showed that there are alternating periods of mild and
severe climates which correspond to the long-period cycles of the
oceanic tides. The world’s most recent period of maximum tides, and most
rigorous climate, occurred about 1433, its effect being felt, however,
for several centuries before and after that year. The minimum tidal
effect prevailed about A.D. 550, and it will occur again about the year
2400.

[L] _Svenska Hydrog.-Biol. Komm. Skrifter_, No. 5, 1912.

-----

During the latest period of benevolent climate, snow and ice were little
known on the coast of Europe and in the seas about Iceland and
Greenland. Then the Vikings sailed freely over northern seas, monks went
back and forth between Ireland and ‘Thule’ or Iceland, and there was
easy intercourse between Great Britain and the Scandinavian countries.
When Eric the Red voyaged to Greenland, according to the Sagas, he ‘came
from the sea to land at the middle glacier—from thence he went south
along the coast to see if the land was habitable. The first year he
wintered on Erik’s Island . . .’ This was probably in the year 984.
There is no mention in the Sagas that Eric was hampered by drift ice in
the several years of his exploration of the island; nor is there mention
of drift ice anywhere about Greenland, or between Greenland and
Wineland. Eric’s route as described in the Sagas—proceeding directly
west from Iceland and then down the east coast of Greenland—is one that
would have been impossible during recent centuries. In the thirteenth
century the Sagas contain for the first time a warning that those who
sail for Greenland should not make the coast too directly west of
Iceland on account of the ice in the sea, but no new route is then
recommended. At the end of the fourteenth century, however, the old
sailing route was abandoned and new sailing directions were given for a
more southwesterly course that would avoid the ice.

The early Sagas spoke, too, of the abundant fruit of excellent quality
growing in Greenland, and of the number of cattle that could be pastured
there. The Norwegian settlements were located in places that are now at
the foot of glaciers. There are Eskimo legends of old houses and
churches buried under the ice. The Danish Archaeological Expedition sent
out by the National Museum of Copenhagen was never able to find all of
the villages mentioned in the old records. But its excavations indicated
clearly that the colonists lived in a climate definitely milder than the
present one.

But these bland climatic conditions began to deteriorate in the
thirteenth century. The Eskimos began to make troublesome raids, perhaps
because their northern sealing grounds were frozen over and they were
hungry. They attacked the western settlement near the present Ameralik
Fiord, and when an official mission went out from the eastern colony
about 1342, not a single colonist could be found—only a few cattle
remained. The eastern settlement was wiped out some time after 1418 and
the houses and churches destroyed by fire. Perhaps the fate of the
Greenland colonies was in part due to the fact that ships from Iceland
and Europe were finding it increasingly difficult to reach Greenland,
and the colonists had to be left to their own resources.

The climatic rigors experienced in Greenland in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries were felt also in Europe in a series of unusual
events and extraordinary catastrophes. The seacoast of Holland was
devastated by storm floods. Old Icelandic records say that, in the
winters of the early 1300’s, packs of wolves crossed on the ice from
Norway to Denmark. The entire Baltic froze over, forming a bridge of
solid ice between Sweden and the Danish islands. Pedestrians and
carriages crossed the frozen sea and hostelries were put up on the ice
to accommodate them. The freezing of the Baltic seems to have shifted
the course of storms originating in the low-pressure belt south of
Iceland. In southern Europe, as a result, there were unusual storms,
crop failures, famine, and distress. Icelandic literature abounds in
tales of volcanic eruptions and other violent natural catastrophes that
occurred during the fourteenth century.

What of the previous era of cold and storms, which should have occurred
about the third or fourth century B.C., according to the tidal theory?
There are shadowy hints in early literature and folklore. The dark and
brooding poetry of the Edda deals with a great catastrophe, the
Fimbul-winter or Götterdämmerung, when frost and snow ruled the world
for generations. When Pytheas journeyed to the seas north of Iceland in
330 B.C., he spoke of the _mare pigrum_, a sluggish, congealed sea.
Early history contains striking suggestions that the restless movements
of the tribes of northern Europe—the southward migrations of the
‘barbarians’ who shook the power of Rome—coincided with periods of
storms, floods, and other climatic catastrophes that forced their
migrations. Large-scale inundations of the sea destroyed the homelands
of the Teutons and Cimbrians in Jutland and sent them southward into
Gaul. Tradition among the Druids said that their ancestors had been
expelled from their lands on the far side of the Rhine by enemy tribes
and by ‘a great invasion of the ocean.’ And about the year 700 B.C. the
trade routes for amber, found on the coasts of the North Sea, were
suddenly shifted to the east. The old route came down along the Elbe,
the Weser, and the Danube, through the Brenner Pass to Italy. The new
route followed the Vistula, suggesting that the source of supply was
then the Baltic. Perhaps storm floods had destroyed the earlier amber
districts, as they invaded these same regions eighteen centuries later.

All these ancient records of climatic variations seemed to Pettersson an
indication that cyclic changes in the oceanic circulation and in the
conditions of the Atlantic had occurred. ‘No geologic alteration that
could influence the climate has occurred for the past six or seven
centuries,’ he wrote. The very nature of these phenomena—floods,
inundations, ice blockades—suggested to him a dislocation of the
oceanic circulation. Applying the discoveries in his laboratory on
Gulmarfiord, he believed that the climatic changes were brought about as
the tide-induced submarine waves disturbed the deep waters of polar
seas. Although tidal movements are often weak at the surface of these
seas, they set up strong pulsations at the submarine boundaries, where
there is a layer of comparatively fresh, cold water lying upon a layer
of salty, warmer water. In the years or the centuries of strong tidal
forces, unusual quantities of warm Atlantic water press into the Arctic
Sea at deep levels, moving in under the ice. Then thousands of square
miles of ice that normally remain solidly frozen undergo partial thawing
and break up. Drift ice, in extraordinary volume, enters the Labrador
Current and is carried southward into the Atlantic. This changes the
pattern of surface circulation, which is so intimately related to the
winds, the rainfall, and the air temperatures. For the drift ice then
attacks the Gulf Stream south of Newfoundland and sends it on a more
easterly course, deflecting the streams of warm surface water that
usually bring a softening effect to the climate of Greenland, Iceland,
Spitsbergen, and northern Europe. The position of the low-pressure belt
south of Iceland is also shifted, with further direct effect on European
climate.

Although the really catastrophic disturbances of the polar regime come
only every eighteen centuries, according to Pettersson, there are also
rhythmically occurring periods that fall at varying intervals—for
example, every 9, 18, or 36 years. These correspond to other tidal
cycles. They produce climatic variations of shorter period and of less
drastic nature.

The year 1903, for instance, was memorable for its outbursts of polar
ice in the Arctic and for the repercussions on Scandinavian fisheries.
There was ‘a general failure of cod, herring, and other fish along the
coast from Finmarken and Lofoten to the Skagerrak and Kattegat. The
greater part of the Barents Sea was covered with pack ice up to May, the
ice border approaching closer to the Murman and Finmarken coasts than
ever before. Herds of arctic seals visited these coasts, and some
species of the arctic whitefish extended their migrations to the
Christiana Fiord and even entered into the Baltic.’ This outbreak of ice
came in a year when earth, moon, and sun were in a relative position
that gives a secondary maximum of the tide-producing forces. The similar
constellation of 1912 was another great ice year in the Labrador
Current—a year that brought the disaster of the _Titanic_.

Now in our own lifetime we are witnessing a startling alteration of
climate, and it is intriguing to apply Otto Pettersson’s ideas as a
possible explanation. It is now established beyond question that a
definite change in the arctic climate set in about 1900, that it became
astonishingly marked about 1930, and that it is now spreading into
sub-arctic and temperate regions. The frigid top of the world is very
clearly warming up.

The trend toward a milder climate in the Arctic is perhaps most
strikingly apparent in the greater ease of navigation in the North
Atlantic and the Arctic Sea. In 1932, for example, the _Knipowitsch_
sailed around Franz Josef Land for the first time in the history of
arctic voyaging. And three years later the Russian ice-breaker _Sadko_
went from the northern tip of Novaya Zemlya to a point north of
Severnaya Zemlya (Northern Land) and thence to 82° 41´ north
latitude—the northernmost point ever reached by a ship under its own
power.

In 1940 the whole northern coast of Europe and Asia was remarkably free
from ice during the summer months, and more than 100 vessels engaged in
trade via the arctic routes. In 1942 a vessel unloaded supplies at the
west Greenland port of Upernivik (latitude 72° 43´ N) during Christmas
week ‘in almost complete winter darkness.’ During the ’forties the
season for shipping coal from West Spitsbergen ports lengthened to seven
months, compared with three at the beginning of the century. The season
when pack ice lies about Iceland became shorter by about two months than
it was a century ago. Drift ice in the Russian sector of the Arctic Sea
decreased by a million square kilometers between 1924 and 1944, and in
the Laptev Sea two islands of fossil ice melted away completely, their
position being marked by submarine shoals.

Activities in the nonhuman world also reflect the warming of the
Arctic—the changed habits and migrations of many fishes, birds, land
mammals, and whales.

Many new birds are appearing in far northern lands for the first time in
our records. The long list of southern visitors—birds never reported in
Greenland before 1920—includes the American velvet scoter, the greater
yellowlegs, American avocet, black-browed albatross, northern cliff
swallow, ovenbird, common crossbill, Baltimore oriole, and Canada
warbler. Some high-arctic forms, which thrive in cold climates, have
shown their distaste for the warmer temperatures by visiting Greenland
in sharply decreasing numbers. Such abstainers include the northern
horned lark, the grey plover, and the pectoral sandpiper. Iceland, too,
has had an extraordinary number of boreal and even subtropical avian
visitors since 1935, coming from both America and Europe. Wood warblers,
skylarks, and Siberian rubythroats, scarlet grosbeaks, pipits, and
thrushes now provide exciting fare for Icelandic bird watchers.

When the cod first appeared at Angmagssalik in Greenland in 1912, it was
a new and strange fish to the Eskimos and Danes. Within their memory it
had never before appeared on the east coast of the island. But they
began to catch it, and by the 1930’s it supported so substantial a
fishery in the area that the natives had become dependent upon it for
food. They were also using its oil as fuel for their lamps and to heat
their houses.

On the west coast of Greenland, too, the cod was a rarity at the turn of
the century, although there was a small fishery, taking about 500 tons a
year, at a few places on the southwest coast. About 1919 the cod began
to move north along the west Greenland coast and to become more
abundant. The center of the fishery has moved 300 miles farther north,
and the catch is now about 15,000 tons a year.

Other fishes seldom or never before reported in Greenland have appeared
there. The coalfish or green cod is a European fish so foreign to
Greenland waters that when two of them were caught in 1831 they were
promptly preserved in salt and sent to the Copenhagen Zoological Museum.
But since 1924 this fish has often been found among the cod shoals. The
haddock, cusk, and ling, unknown in Greenland waters until about 1930,
are now taken regularly. Iceland, too, has strange
visitors—warmth-loving southern fishes, like the basking shark, the
grotesque sunfish, the six-gilled shark, the swordfish, and the horse
mackerel. Some of these same species have penetrated into the Barents
and White seas and along the Murman coast.

As the chill of the northern waters has abated and the fish have moved
poleward, the fisheries around Iceland have expanded enormously, and it
has become profitable for trawlers to push on to Bear Island,
Spitsbergen, and the Barents Sea. These waters now yield perhaps two
billion pounds of cod a year—the largest catch of a single species by
any fishery in the world. But its existence is tenuous. If the cycle
turns, the waters begin to chill, and the ice floes creep southward
again, there is nothing man can do that will preserve the arctic
fisheries.

But for the present, the evidence that the top of the world is growing
warmer is to be found on every hand. The recession of the northern
glaciers is going on at such a rate that many smaller ones have already
disappeared. If the present rate of melting continues others will soon
follow them.

The melting away of the snowfields in the Opdal Mountains in Norway has
exposed wooden-shafted arrows of a type used about A.D. 400 to 500. This
suggests that the snow cover in this region must now be less than it has
been at any time within the past 1400 to 1500 years.

The glaciologist Hans Ahlmann reports that most Norwegian glaciers ‘are
living only on their own mass without receiving any annual fresh supply
of snow’; that in the Alps there has been a general retreat and
shrinkage of glaciers during the last decades, which became
‘catastrophic’ in the summer of 1947; and that all glaciers around the
Northern Atlantic coasts are shrinking. The most rapid recession of all
is occurring in Alaska, where the Muir Glacier receded about 10½
kilometers in 12 years.

At present the vast antarctic glaciers are an enigma; no one can say
whether they also are melting away, or at what rate. But reports from
other parts of the world show that the northern glaciers are not the
only ones that are receding. The glaciers of several East African high
volcanoes have been diminishing since they were first studied in the
1800’s—very rapidly since 1920—and there is glacial shrinkage in the
Andes and also in the high mountains of central Asia.

The milder arctic and sub-arctic climate seems already to have resulted
in longer growing seasons and better crops. The cultivation of oats has
improved in Iceland. In Norway good seed years are now the rule rather
than the exception, and even in northern Scandinavia the trees have
spread rapidly above their former timber lines, and both pine and spruce
are making a quicker annual growth than they have for some time.

The countries where the most striking changes are taking place are those
whose climate is most directly under the control of the North Atlantic
currents. Greenland, Iceland, Spitsbergen, and all of northern Europe,
as we have seen, experience heat and cold, drought and flood in
accordance with the varying strength and warmth of the eastward and
northward-moving currents of the Atlantic. Oceanographers who have been
studying the matter during the 1940’s have discovered many significant
changes in the temperature and distribution of great masses of ocean
water. Apparently the branch of the Gulf Stream that flows past
Spitsbergen has so increased in volume that it now brings in a great
body of warm water. Surface waters of the North Atlantic show rising
temperatures; so do the deeper layers around Iceland and Spitsbergen.
Sea temperatures in the North Sea and along the coast of Norway have
been growing warmer since the 1920’s.

Unquestionably, there are other agents at work in bringing about the
climatic changes in the Arctic and sub-Arctic regions. For one thing, it
is almost certainly true that we are still in the warming-up stage
following the last Pleistocene glaciation—that the world’s climate,
over the next thousands of years, will grow considerably warmer before
beginning a downward swing into another Ice Age. But what we are
experiencing now is perhaps a climatic change of shorter duration,
measurable only in decades or centuries. Some scientists say that there
must have been a small increase in solar activity, changing the pattern
of air circulation and causing the southerly winds to blow more
frequently in Scandinavia and Spitsbergen; changes in ocean currents,
according to this view, are secondary effects of the shift of prevailing
winds.

But if, as Professor Brooks thinks, the Pettersson tidal theory has as
good a foundation as that of changing solar radiation, then it is
interesting to calculate where our twentieth-century situation fits into
the cosmic scheme of the shifting cycles of the tides. The great tides
at the close of the Middle Ages, with their accompanying snow and ice,
furious winds, and inundating floods, are more than five centuries
behind us. The era of weakest tidal movements, with a climate as benign
as that of the early Middle Ages, is about four centuries ahead. We have
therefore begun to move strongly into a period of warmer, milder
weather. There will be fluctuations, as earth and sun and moon move
through space and the tidal power waxes and wanes. But the long trend is
toward a warmer earth; the pendulum is swinging.




                      _Wealth from the Salt Seas_


                           A SEA CHANGE INTO SOMETHING RICH AND STRANGE.
                                                            —SHAKESPEARE

THE ocean is the earth’s greatest storehouse of minerals. In a single
cubic mile of sea water there are, on the average, 166 million tons of
dissolved salts, and in all the ocean waters of the earth there are
about 50 quadrillion tons. And it is in the nature of things for this
quantity to be gradually increasing over the millennia, for although the
earth is constantly shifting her component materials from place to
place, the heaviest movements are forever seaward.

It has been assumed that the first seas were only faintly saline and
that their saltiness has been growing over the eons of time. For the
primary source of the ocean’s salt is the rocky mantle of the
continents. When those first rains came—the centuries-long rains that
fell from the heavy clouds enveloping the young earth—they began the
processes of wearing away the rocks and carrying their contained
minerals to the sea. The annual flow of water seaward is believed to be
about 6500 cubic miles, this inflow of river water adding to the ocean
several billion tons of salts.

It is a curious fact that there is little similarity between the
chemical composition of river water and that of sea water. The various
elements are present in entirely different proportions. The rivers bring
in four times as much calcium as chloride, for example, yet in the ocean
the proportions are strongly reversed—46 times as much chloride as
calcium. An important reason for the difference is that immense amounts
of calcium salts are constantly being withdrawn from the sea water by
marine animals and are used for building shells and skeletons—for the
microscopic shells that house the foraminifera, for the massive
structures of the coral reefs, and for the shells of oysters and clams
and other mollusks. Another reason is the precipitation of calcium from
sea water. There is a striking difference, too, in the silicon content
of river and sea water—about 500 per cent greater in rivers than in the
sea. The silica is required by diatoms to make their shells, and so the
immense quantities brought in by rivers are largely utilized by these
ubiquitous plants of the sea. Often there are exceptionally heavy
growths of diatoms off the mouths of rivers. Because of the enormous
total chemical requirements of all the fauna and flora of the sea, only
a small part of the salts annually brought in by rivers goes to
increasing the quantity of dissolved minerals in the water. The
inequalities of chemical make-up are further reduced by reactions that
are set in motion immediately the fresh water is discharged into the
sea, and by the enormous disparities of volume between the incoming
fresh water and the ocean.

There are other agencies by which minerals are added to the sea—from
obscure sources buried deep within the earth. From every volcano
chlorine and other gases escape into the atmosphere and are carried down
in rain onto the surface of land and sea. Volcanic ash and rock bring up
other materials. And all the submarine volcanoes, discharging through
unseen craters directly into the sea, pour in boron, chlorine, sulphur,
and iodine.

All this is a one-way flow of minerals to the sea. Only to a very
limited extent is there any return of salts to the land. We attempt to
recover some of them directly by chemical extraction and mining, and
indirectly by harvesting the sea’s plants and animals. There is another
way, in the long, recurring cycles of the earth, by which the sea itself
gives back to the land what it has received. This happens when the ocean
waters rise over the lands, deposit their sediments, and at last
withdraw, leaving over the continent another layer of sedimentary rocks.
These contain some of the water and salts of the sea. But it is only a
temporary loan of minerals to the land and the return payment begins at
once by way of the old, familiar channels—rain, erosion, run-off to the
rivers, transport to the sea.

There are other curious little exchanges of materials between sea and
land. While the process of evaporation, which raises water vapor into
the air, leaves most of the salts behind, a surprising amount of salt
does intrude itself into the atmosphere and rides long distances on the
wind. The so-called ‘cyclic salt’ is picked up by the winds from the
spray of a rough, cresting sea or breaking surf and is blown inland,
then brought down in rain and returned by rivers to the ocean. These
tiny, invisible particles of sea salt drifting in the atmosphere are, in
fact, one of the many forms of atmospheric nuclei around which raindrops
form. Areas nearest the sea, in general, receive the most salt.
Published figures have listed 24 to 36 pounds per acre per year for
England and more than 100 pounds for British Guiana. But the most
astounding example of long-distance, large-scale transport of cyclic
salts is furnished by Sambhar Salt Lake in northern India. It receives
3000 tons of salt a year, carried to it on the hot dry monsoons of
summer from the sea, 400 miles away.

The plants and animals of the sea are very much better chemists than
men, and so far our own efforts to extract the mineral wealth of the sea
have been feeble compared with those of lower forms of life. They have
been able to find and to utilize elements present in such minute traces
that human chemists could not detect their presence until, very
recently, highly refined methods of spectroscopic analysis were
developed.

We did not know, for example, that vanadium occurred in the sea until it
was discovered in the blood of certain sluggish and sedentary sea
creatures, the holothurians (of which sea cucumbers are an example) and
the ascidians. Relatively huge quantities of cobalt are extracted by
lobsters and mussels, and nickel is utilized by various mollusks, yet it
is only within recent years that we have been able to recover even
traces of these elements. Copper is recoverable only as about a
hundredth part in a million of sea water, yet it helps to constitute the
life blood of lobsters, entering into their respiratory pigments as iron
does into human blood.

In contrast to the accomplishments of invertebrate chemists, we have so
far had only limited success in extracting sea salts in quantities we
can use for commercial purposes, despite their prodigious quantity and
considerable variety. We have recovered about fifty of the known
elements by chemical analysis, and shall perhaps find that all the
others are there, when we can develop proper methods to discover them.
Five salts predominate and are present in fixed proportions. As we would
expect, sodium chloride is by far the most abundant, making up 77.8 per
cent of the total salts; magnesium chloride follows, with 10.9 per cent;
then magnesium sulphate, 4.7 per cent; calcium sulphate, 3.6 per cent;
and potassium sulphate, 2.5 per cent. All others combined make up the
remaining .5 per cent.

Of all the elements present in the sea, probably none has stirred men’s
dreams more than gold. It is there—in all the waters covering the
greater part of the earth’s surface—enough in total quantity to make
every person in the world a millionaire. But how can the sea be made to
yield it? The most determined attempt to wrest a substantial quantity of
gold from ocean waters—and also the most complete study of the gold in
sea water—was made by the German chemist Fritz Haber after the First
World War. Haber conceived the idea of extracting enough gold from the
sea to pay the German war debt and his dream resulted in the German
South Atlantic Expedition of the _Meteor_. The _Meteor_ was equipped
with a laboratory and filtration plant, and between the years 1924 and
1928 the vessel crossed and recrossed the Atlantic, sampling the water.
But the quantity found was less than had been expected, and the cost of
extraction far greater than the value of the gold recovered. The
practical economics of the matter are about as follows: in a cubic mile
of sea water there is about $93,000,000 in gold and $8,500,000 in
silver. But to treat this volume of water in a year would require the
twice-daily filling and emptying of 200 tanks of water, each 500 feet
square and 5 feet deep. Probably this is no greater feat, relatively,
than is accomplished regularly by corals, sponges, and oysters, but by
human standards it is not economically feasible.

Most mysterious, perhaps, of all substances in the sea is iodine. In sea
water it is one of the scarcest of the nonmetals, difficult to detect
and resisting exact analysis. Yet it is found in almost every marine
plant and animal. Sponges, corals, and certain seaweeds accumulate vast
quantities of it. Apparently the iodine in the sea is in a constant
state of chemical change, sometimes being oxidized, sometimes reduced,
again entering into organic combinations. There seem to be constant
interchanges between air and sea, the iodine in some form perhaps being
carried into the air in spray, for the air at sea level contains
detectable quantities, which decrease with altitude. From the time
living things first made iodine a part of the chemistry of their
tissues, they seem to have become increasingly dependent on it; now we
ourselves could not exist without it as a regulator of the basal
metabolism of our bodies, through the thyroid gland which accumulates
it.

All commercial iodine was formerly obtained from seaweeds; then the
deposits of crude nitrate of soda from the high deserts of North Chile
were discovered. Probably the original source of this raw
material—called ‘caliche’—was some prehistoric sea filled with marine
vegetation, but that is a subject of controversy. Iodine is obtained
also from brine deposits and from the subterranean waters of oil-bearing
rocks—all indirectly of marine origin.

A monopoly on the world’s bromine is held by the ocean, where 99 per
cent of it is now concentrated. The tiny fraction present in rocks was
originally deposited there by the sea. First we obtained it from the
brines left in subterranean pools by prehistoric oceans; now there are
large plants on the seacoasts—especially in the United States—which
use ocean water as their raw material and extract the bromine directly.
Thanks to modern methods of commercial production of bromine we have
high-test gasoline for our cars. There is a long list of other uses,
including the manufacture of sedatives, fire extinguishers, photographic
chemicals, dyestuffs, and chemical warfare materials.

One of the oldest bromine derivatives known to man was Tyrian purple,
which the Phoenicians made in their dyehouses from the purple snail,
Murex. This snail may be linked in a curious and wonderful way with the
prodigious and seemingly unreasonable quantities of bromine found today
in the Dead Sea, which contains, it is estimated, some 850 million tons
of the chemical. The concentration of bromine in Dead Sea water is 100
times that in the ocean. Apparently the supply is constantly renewed by
underground hot springs, which discharge into the bottom of the Sea of
Galilee, which in turn sends its waters to the Dead Sea by way of the
River Jordan. Some authorities believe that the source of the bromine in
the hot springs is a deposit of billions of ancient snails, laid down by
the sea of a bygone age in a stratum long since buried.

Magnesium is another mineral we now obtain by collecting huge volumes of
ocean water and treating it with chemicals, although originally it was
derived only from brines or from the treatment of such
magnesium-containing rocks as dolomite, of which whole mountain ranges
are composed. In a cubic mile of sea water there are about 4 million
tons of magnesium. Since the direct extraction method was developed
about 1941, production has increased enormously. It was magnesium from
the sea that made possible the wartime growth of the aviation industry,
for every airplane made in the United States (and in most other
countries as well) contains about half a ton of magnesium metal. And it
has innumerable uses in other industries where a light-weight metal is
desired, besides its long-standing utility as an insulating material,
and its use in printing inks, medicines, and toothpastes, and in such
war implements as incendiary bombs, star shells, and tracer ammunition.

Wherever climate has permitted it, men have evaporated salt from sea
water for many centuries. Under the burning sun of the tropics the
ancient Greeks, Romans, and Egyptians harvested the salt men and animals
everywhere must have in order to live. Even today in parts of the world
that are hot and dry and where drying winds blow, solar evaporation of
salt is practiced—on the shores of the Persian Gulf, in China, India,
and Japan, in the Philippines, and on the coast of California and the
alkali flats of Utah.

Here and there are natural basins where the action of sun and wind and
sea combine to carry on evaporation of salt on a scale far greater than
human industry could accomplish. Such a natural basin is the Rann of
Cutch on the west coast of India. The Rann is a flat plain, some 60 by
185 miles, separated from the sea by the island of Cutch. When the
southwest monsoons blow, sea water is carried in by way of a channel to
cover the plain. But in summer, in the season when the hot northeast
monsoon blows from the desert, no more water enters, and that which is
collected in pools over the plain evaporates into a salt crust, in some
places several feet thick.

Where the sea has come in over the land, laid down its deposits, and
then withdrawn, there have been created reservoirs of chemicals, upon
which we can draw with comparatively little trouble. Hidden deep under
the surface of our earth are pools of ‘fossil salt water,’ the brine of
ancient seas; ‘fossil deserts,’ the salt of old seas that evaporated
away under conditions of extreme heat and dryness; and layers of
sedimentary rock in which are contained the organic sediments and the
dissolved salts of the sea that deposited them.

During the Permian period, which was a time of great heat and dryness
and widespread deserts, a vast inland sea formed over much of Europe,
covering parts of the present Britain, France, Germany, and Poland.
Rains came seldom and the rate of evaporation was high. The sea became
exceedingly salty, and it began to deposit layers of salts. For a period
covering thousands of years, only gypsum was deposited, perhaps
representing a time when water fresh from the ocean occasionally entered
the inland sea to mix with its strong brine. Alternating with the gypsum
were thicker beds of salt. Later, as its area shrank and the sea grew
still more concentrated, deposits of potassium and magnesium sulphates
were formed (this stage representing perhaps 500 years); still later,
and perhaps for another 500 years, there were laid down mixed potassium
and magnesium chlorides or carnallite. After the sea had completely
evaporated, desert conditions prevailed, and soon the salt deposits were
buried under sand. The richest beds form the famous deposits of
Stassfurt and Alsace; toward the outskirts of the original area of the
old sea (as, for example, in England) there are only beds of salt. The
Stassfurt beds are about 2500 feet thick; their springs of brine have
been known since the thirteenth century, and the salts have been mined
since the seventeenth century.

At an even earlier geological period—the Silurian—a great salt basin
was deposited in the northern part of the United States, extending from
central New York State across Michigan, including northern Pennsylvania
and Ohio and part of southern Ontario. Because of the hot, dry climate
of that time, the inland sea lying over this place grew so salty that
beds of salt and gypsum were deposited over a great area covering about
100,000 square miles. There are seven distinct beds of salt at Ithaca,
New York, the uppermost lying at a depth of about half a mile. In
southern Michigan some of the individual salt beds are more than 500
feet thick, and the aggregate thickness of salt in the center of the
Michigan Basin is approximately 2000 feet. In some places rock salt is
mined; in others wells are dug, water is forced down, and the resulting
brine is pumped to the surface and evaporated to recover the salt.

One of the greatest stock piles of minerals in the world came from the
evaporation of a great inland sea in the western United States. This is
Searles Lake in the Mohave Desert of California. An arm of the sea that
overlay this region was cut off from the ocean by the thrusting up of a
range of mountains; as the lake evaporated away, the water that remained
became ever more salty through the inwash of minerals from all the
surrounding land. Perhaps Searles Lake began its slow transformation
from a landlocked sea to a ‘frozen’ lake—a lake of solid minerals—only
a few thousand years ago; now its surface is a hard crust of salts over
which a car may be driven. The crystals of salts form a layer 50 to 70
feet deep. Below that is mud. Engineers have recently discovered a
second layer of salts and brine, probably at least as thick as the upper
layer, underlying the mud. Searles Lake was first worked in the 1870’s
for borax; then teams of 20 mules each carried the borax across desert
and mountains to the railroads. In the 1930’s the recovery of other
substances from the lake began—bromine, lithium, and salts of potassium
and sodium. Now Searles Lake yields 40 per cent of the production of
potassium chloride in the United States and a large share of all the
borax and lithium salts produced in the world.

In some future era the Dead Sea will probably repeat the history of
Searles Lake, as the centuries pass and evaporation continues. The Dead
Sea as we know it is all that remains of a much larger inland sea that
once filled the entire Jordan Valley and was about 190 miles long; now
it has shrunk to about a fourth of this length and a fourth of its
former volume. And with the shrinkage and the evaporation in the hot dry
climate has come the concentration of salts that makes the Dead Sea a
great reservoir of minerals. No animal life can exist in its brine; such
luckless fish as are brought down by the River Jordan die and provide
food for the sea birds. It is 1300 feet below the Mediterranean, lying
farther below sea level than any other body of water in the world. It
occupies the lowest part of the rift valley of the Jordan, which was
created by a down-slipping of a block of the earth’s crust. The water of
the Dead Sea is warmer than the air, a condition favoring evaporation,
and clouds of its vapor float, nebulous and half formed, above it, while
its brine grows more bitter and the salts accumulate.

Of all legacies of the ancient seas the most valuable is petroleum.
Exactly what geologic processes have created the precious pools of
liquid deep within the earth no one knows with enough certainty to
describe the whole sequence of events. But this much seems to be true:
Petroleum is a result of fundamental earth processes that have been
operating ever since an abundant and varied life was developed in the
sea—at least since the beginning of Paleozoic time, probably longer.
Exceptional and catastrophic occurrences may now and then aid its
formation but they are not essential; the mechanism that regularly
generates petroleum consists of the normal processes of earth and
sea—the living and dying of creatures, the deposit of sediments, the
advance and retreat of the seas over the continents, the upward and
downward foldings of the earth’s crust.

The old inorganic theory that linked petroleum formation with volcanic
action has been abandoned by most geologists. The origin of petroleum is
most likely to be found in the bodies of plants and animals buried under
the fine-grained sediments of former seas and there subjected to slow
decomposition.

Perhaps the essence of conditions favoring petroleum production is
represented by the stagnant waters of the Black Sea or of certain
Norwegian fiords. The surprisingly abundant life of the Black Sea is
confined to the upper layers; the deeper and especially the bottom
waters are devoid of oxygen and are often permeated with hydrogen
sulphide. In these poisoned waters there can be no bottom scavengers to
devour the bodies of marine animals that drift down from above, so they
are entombed in the fine sediments. In many Norwegian fiords the deep
layers are foul and oxygenless because the mouth of the fiord is cut off
from the circulation of the open sea by a shallow sill. The bottom
layers of such fiords are poisoned by the hydrogen sulphide from
decomposing organic matter. Sometimes storms drive in unusual quantities
of oceanic water and through turbulence of waves stir deeply the waters
of these lethal pools; the mixing of the water layers that follows
brings death to hordes of fishes and invertebrates living near the
surface. Such a catastrophe leads to the deposit of a rich layer of
organic material on the bottom.

Wherever great oil fields are found, they are related to past or present
seas. This is true of the inland fields as well as of those near the
present seacoast. The great quantities of oil that have been obtained
from the Oklahoma fields, for example, were trapped in spaces within
sedimentary rocks laid down under seas that invaded this part of North
America in Paleozoic time.

The search for petroleum has also led geologists repeatedly to those
‘unstable belts, covered much of the time by shallow seas, which lie
around the margins of the main continental platforms, between them and
the great oceanic deeps.’

An example of such a depressed segment of crust lying between
continental masses is the one between Europe and the Near East, occupied
in part by the Persian Gulf, the Red, Black, and Caspian seas, and the
Mediterranean Sea. The Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea lie in
another basin or shallow sea between the Americas. A shallow,
island-studded sea lies between the continents of Asia and Australia.
Lastly, there is the nearly landlocked sea of the Arctic. In past ages
all of these areas have been alternately raised and depressed, belonging
at one time to the land, at another to the encroaching sea. During their
periods of submersion they have received thick deposits of sediments,
and in their waters a rich marine fauna has lived, died, and drifted
down into the soft sediment carpet.

There are vast oil deposits in all these areas. In the Near East are the
great fields of Saudi Arabia, Iran, and Iraq. The shallow depression
between Asia and Australia yields the oil of Java, Sumatra, Borneo, and
New Guinea. The American mediterranean is the center of oil production
in the Western Hemisphere—half the proved resources of the United
States come from the northern shore of the Gulf of Mexico, and Colombia,
Venezuela, and Mexico have rich oil fields along the western and
southern margins of the Gulf. The Arctic is one of the unproved
frontiers of the petroleum industry, but oil seepages in northern
Alaska, on islands north of the Canadian mainland, and along the Arctic
coast of Siberia hint that this land recently raised from the sea may be
one of the great oil fields of the future.

In recent years, the speculations of petroleum geologists have been
focused in a new direction—under sea. By no means all of the land
resources of petroleum have been discovered, but probably the richest
and most easily worked fields are being tapped, and their possible
production is known. The ancient seas gave us the oil that is now being
drawn out of the earth. Can the ocean today be induced to give up some
of the oil that must be trapped in sedimentary rocks under its floor,
covered by water scores or hundreds of fathoms deep?

Oil is already being produced from offshore wells, on the continental
shelf. Off California, Texas, and Louisiana, oil companies have drilled
into the sediments of the shelf and are obtaining oil. In the United
States the most active exploration has been centered in the Gulf of
Mexico. Judging from its geologic history, this area has rich promise.
For eons of time it was either dry land or a very shallow sea basin,
receiving the sediments that washed into it from high lands to the
north. Finally, about the middle of the Cretaceous period, the floor of
the Gulf began to sink under the load of sediments and in time it
acquired its present deep central basin.

By geophysical exploration, we can see that the layers of sedimentary
rock underlying the coastal plain tilt steeply downward and pass under
the broad continental shelf of the Gulf. Down in the layers deposited in
the Jurassic period is a thick salt bed of enormous extent, probably
formed when this part of the earth was hot and dry, a place of shrinking
seas and encroaching deserts. In Louisiana and Texas, and also, it now
appears, out in the Gulf itself, extraordinary features known as salt
domes are associated with this deposit. These are fingerlike plugs of
salt, usually less than a mile across, pushing up from the deep layer
toward the earth’s surface. They have been described by geologists as
‘driven up through 5000 to 15,000 feet of sediments by earth pressures,
like nails through a board.’ In the states bordering the Gulf such
structures have often been associated with oil. It seems probable that
on the continental shelf, also, the salt domes may mark large oil
deposits.

In exploring the Gulf for oil, therefore, geologists search for the salt
domes where the larger oil fields are likely to lie. They use an
instrument known as a magnetometer, which measures the variations in
magnetic intensity brought about by the salt domes. Gravity meters also
help locate the domes by measuring the variation in gravity near them,
the specific gravity of salt being less than that of the surrounding
sediments. The actual location and outline of the dome are discovered by
seismographic exploration, which traces the inclination of the rock
strata by recording the reflection of sound waves produced by dynamite
explosions. These methods of exploration have been used on land for some
years, but only since about 1945 have they been adapted to use in
offshore Gulf waters. The magnetometer has been so improved that it will
map continuously while being towed behind a boat or carried in or
suspended from a plane. A gravity meter can now be lowered rapidly to
the bottom and readings made by remote control. (Once an operator had to
descend with it in a diving bell.) Seismic crews may shoot off their
dynamite charges and make continuous recordings while their boats are
under way.

Despite all these improvements which allow exploration to proceed
rapidly, it is no simple matter to obtain oil from undersea fields.
Prospecting must be followed by the leasing of potential oil-producing
areas, and then by drilling to see whether oil is actually there.
Offshore drilling platforms rest on piles that must be driven as far as
250 feet into the floor of the Gulf to withstand the force of waves,
especially during the season for hurricanes. Winds, storm waves, fogs,
the corrosive gnawing of sea water upon metal structures—all these are
hazards that must be faced and overcome. Yet the technical difficulties
of far more extensive offshore operations than any now attempted do not
discourage specialists in petroleum engineering.

So our search for mineral wealth often leads us back to the seas of
ancient times—to the oil pressed from the bodies of fishes, seaweeds,
and other forms of plant and animal life and then stored away in ancient
rocks; to the rich brines hidden in subterranean pools where the fossil
water of old seas still remains; to the layers of salts that are the
mineral substance of those old seas laid down as a covering mantle over
the continents. Perhaps in time, as we learn the chemical secrets of the
corals and sponges and diatoms, we shall depend less on the stored
wealth of prehistoric seas and shall go more and more directly to the
ocean and the rocks now forming under its shallow waters.




                          _The Encircling Sea_


                        A SEA FROM WHICH BIRDS TRAVEL NOT WITHIN A YEAR,
                                              SO VAST IT IS AND FEARFUL.
                                                                  —HOMER

TO the ancient Greeks the ocean was an endless stream that flowed
forever around the border of the world, ceaselessly turning upon itself
like a wheel, the end of earth, the beginning of heaven. This ocean was
boundless; it was infinite. If a person were to venture far out upon
it—were such a course thinkable—he would pass through gathering
darkness and obscuring fog and would come at last to a dreadful and
chaotic blending of sea and sky, a place where whirlpools and yawning
abysses waited to draw the traveler down into a dark world from which
there was no return.

These ideas are found, in varying form, in much of the literature of the
ten centuries before the Christian era, and in later years they keep
recurring even through the greater part of the Middle Ages. To the
Greeks the familiar Mediterranean was The Sea. Outside, bathing the
periphery of the land world, was Oceanus. Perhaps somewhere in its
uttermost expanse was the home of the gods and of departed spirits, the
Elysian fields. So we meet the ideas of unattainable continents or of
beautiful islands in the distant ocean, confusedly mingled with
references to a bottomless gulf at the edge of the world—but always
around the disc of the habitable world was the vast ocean, encircling
all.

Perhaps some word-of-mouth tales of the mysterious northern world,
filtering down by way of the early trade routes for amber and tin,
colored the conceptions of the early legends, so that the boundary of
the land world came to be pictured as a place of fog and storms and
darkness. Homer’s _Odyssey_ described the Cimmerians as dwelling in a
distant realm of mist and darkness on the shores of Oceanus, and they
told of the shepherds who lived in the land of the long day, where the
paths of day and night were close. And again perhaps the early poets and
historians derived some of their ideas of the ocean from the
Phoenicians, whose craft roamed the shores of Europe, Asia, and Africa
in search of gold, silver, gems, spices, and wood for their commerce
with kings and emperors. It may well be that these sailor-merchants were
the first ever to cross an ocean, but history does not record the fact.
For at least 2000 years before Christ—probably longer—the flourishing
trade of the Phoenicians was plied along the shores of the Red Sea to
Syria, to Somaliland, to Arabia, even to India and perhaps to China.
Herodotus wrote that they circumnavigated Africa from east to west about
600 B.C., reaching Egypt via the Straits of the Pillars and the
Mediterranean. But the Phoenicians themselves said and wrote little or
nothing of their voyagings, keeping their trade routes and the sources
of their precious cargoes secret. So there are only the vaguest rumors,
sketchily supported by archaeological findings, that the Phoenicians may
have launched out into the open Pacific.

Nor are there anything but rumors and highly plausible suppositions that
the Phoenicians, on their coastwise journeys along western Europe, may
have sailed as far north as the Scandinavian peninsula and the Baltic,
source of the precious amber. There are no definite traces of any such
visits by them, and of course the Phoenicians have left no written
record of any. Of one of their European voyages, however, there is a
secondhand account. This was the expedition under Himlico of Carthage,
which sailed northward along the European coast about the year 500 B.C.
Himlico apparently wrote an account of this voyage, although his
manuscript was not preserved. But his descriptions are quoted by the
Roman Avienus, writing nearly a thousand years later. According to
Avienus, Himlico painted a discouraging picture of the coastwise seas of
Europe:

    These seas can scarcely be sailed through in four months . . .
    no breeze drives the ship forward, so dead is the sluggish wind
    of this idle sea . . . There is much seaweed among the waves
    . . . the surface of the earth is barely covered by a little
    water . . . The monsters of the sea move continually hither and
    thither, and the wild beasts swim among the sluggish and slowly
    creeping ships.

Perhaps the ‘wild beasts’ are the whales of the Bay of Biscay, later to
become a famous whaling ground; the shallow water areas that so
impressed Himlico may have been the flats alternately exposed and
covered by the ebb and flow of the great tides of the French coast—a
strange phenomenon to one from the almost tideless Mediterranean. But
Himlico also had ideas of the open ocean to the west, if the account of
Avienus is to be trusted: ‘Farther to the west from these Pillars there
is boundless sea . . . None has sailed ships over these waters, because
propelling winds are lacking on these deeps . . . likewise because
darkness screens the light of day with a sort of clothing, and because a
fog always conceals the sea.’ Whether these descriptive details are
touches of Phoenician canniness or merely the old ideas reasserting
themselves it is hard to say, but much the same conceptions appear again
and again in later accounts, echoing down the centuries to the very
threshold of modern times.

So far as historical records are concerned, the first great voyage of
marine exploration was by Pytheas of Massilia about 330 B.C.
Unfortunately his writings, including one called _On the Ocean_, are
lost and their substance is preserved for us only in fragmentary
quotations passed on by later writers. We know very little of the
controlling circumstances of the northward voyage of this astronomer and
geographer, but probably Pytheas wished to see how far the _oecumene_ or
land world extended, to learn the position of the Arctic Circle, and to
see the land of midnight sun. Some of these things he may have heard of
through the merchants who brought down tin and amber from the Baltic
lands by the overland trade routes.

Since Pytheas was the first to use astronomical measurements to
determine the geographic location of a place and in other ways had
proved his competence as an astronomer, he brought more than ordinary
skill to an exploratory voyage. He seems to have sailed around Great
Britain, to have reached the Shetland Islands, and then to have launched
out into the open ocean to the north, coming at last to ‘Thule,’ the
land of midnight sun. In this country, he is quoted as reporting, ‘the
nights were very short, in some places two, in others three hours long,
so that the sun rose again a short time after it had set.’ The country
was inhabited by ‘barbarians’ who showed Pytheas ‘the place where the
sun goes to rest.’ The location of Thule’ is a point much disputed by
later authorities, some believing it to have been Iceland, while others
believe that Pytheas crossed the North Sea to Norway. Pytheas is also
said to have described a ‘congealed sea’ lying north of Thule, which
accords better with Iceland.

But the Dark Ages were settling down over the civilized world, and
little of the knowledge of distant places acquired by Pytheas on his
voyagings seems to have impressed the learned men who followed him. The
geographer Posidonius wrote of the ocean that ‘stretched to infinity’
and from Rhodes he undertook a journey all the way to Gadir (Cadiz) to
see the ocean, measure its tides, and determine the truth of the belief
that the sun dropped with the hissing of a red-hot body into the great
western sea.

Not for about 1200 years after Pytheas do we have another clear account
of marine exploration—this time by the Norwegian Ottar. Ottar described
his voyagings in northern seas to King Alfred, who recorded them in a
straightforward narrative of geographic exploration strikingly free from
sea monsters and other imaginary terrors. Ottar, on the basis of this
account, was the first known explorer to round the North Cape, to enter
the Polar or Barents Sea, and later to enter the White Sea. He found the
coasts of these seas inhabited by people of whom he seems to have heard
previously. According to the narrative, he went there ‘chiefly to
explore the country, and for the sake of the walrus, for they have much
valuable bone in their tusks.’ This voyage was probably made between
A.D. 870 and 890.

Meanwhile the age of the Vikings had dawned. The beginning of their more
important expeditions is usually considered to be the end of the eighth
century. But long before that time they had visited other countries of
northern Europe. ‘As early as the third century and until the close of
the fifth century,’ wrote Fridtjof Nansen, ‘the roving Eruli sailed from
Scandinavia, sometimes in company with Saxon pirates, over the seas of
western Europe, ravaging the coasts of Gaul and Spain, and indeed
penetrating in 455 into the Mediterranean as far as Lucca in Italy.’ As
early as the sixth century the Vikings must have crossed the North Sea
to the land of the Franks, and probably to southern Britain. They may
have established themselves in Shetland by the beginning of the seventh
century, and plundered the Hebrides and northwest Ireland about the same
time. Later they sailed to the Faroes and to Iceland; in the last
quarter of the tenth century they established two colonies in Greenland,
and shortly thereafter they steered across the intervening Atlantic
waters to North America. Of the place of these voyages in history Nansen
writes:

    The shipbuilding and seamanship of the Norwegians mark a new
    epoch in the history both of navigation and discovery, and with
    their voyages the knowledge of northern lands and waters was at
    once completely changed . . . We find accounts of these voyages
    of discovery in the old writings and sagas, a large part of
    which was put into writing in Iceland. A somber undercurrent
    runs through these narratives of voyages in unknown seas—the
    silent struggle of hardy men with ice, storms, cold, and want.

    They had neither compass, nor astronomical instruments, nor any
    of the appliances of our time for finding their position at sea;
    they could only sail by the sun, moon, and stars, and it seems
    incomprehensible how for days and weeks, when these were
    invisible, they were able to find their course through fog and
    bad weather; but they found it, and in the open craft of the
    Norwegian Vikings, with their square sails, fared north and west
    over the whole ocean, from Novaya Zemlya and Spitsbergen to
    Greenland, Baffin Bay, Newfoundland, and North America. . . . It
    was not until five hundred years later that the ships of other
    nations were to make their way to the same regions.[M]

[M] From _In Northern Mists_, 1912 edition, A. H. Clark, vol. 1, pp. 234
and 247.

-----

But only the vaguest rumors of any of these things had reached the
‘civilized world’ of the Mediterranean. While the sagas of the Norsemen
were giving clear and factual directions for the passage across oceans,
from known to unknown worlds, the writings of the scholars of the
medieval world dealt still with that outermost encircling ocean, the
dread Sea of Darkness. About the year 1154 the noted Arab geographer
Edrisi wrote for the Norman king of Sicily, Roger II, a description of
the earth, accompanied by yo maps, which portrayed on the outside of all
the known earth the Dark Sea, forming the limit of the world. He wrote
of the sea about the British Isles that it is ‘impossible to penetrate
very far into this ocean.’ He hinted at the existence of far islands but
thought the approach to them difficult because of the ‘fog and deep
darkness that prevails on this sea.’ The scholarly Adam of Bremen,
writing in the eleventh century, knew of the existence of Greenland and
Wineland as distant islands in the great ocean, but could not separate
the reality from the old ideas of that sea, ‘infinite and fearful to
behold, which encompasses the whole world,’ that ocean flowing
‘endlessly around the circle of the earth.’ And even the Norsemen
themselves, as they discovered lands across the Atlantic, seem merely to
have pushed back the boundaries of the place where still there began
that outermost ocean, for the idea of the outer ocean surrounding the
disc of the earth appears in such Northern chronicles as the _Kings
Mirror_ and the _Heimskringla_. And so over that Western Ocean into
which Columbus and his men set out there hung still the legend of a dead
and stagnant sea, of monsters and entrapping weeds, of fog and gloom and
ever present danger.

Yet centuries before Columbus—no one knows how many centuries—men on
the opposite side of the world had laid aside whatever fears the ocean
may have inspired and were boldly sailing their craft across the
Pacific. We know little of the hardships, the difficulties, and the
fears that may have beset the Polynesian colonists—we know only that
somehow they came from the mainland to those islands, remote from any
shore. Perhaps the aspect of these central Pacific waters was kindlier
than that of the North Atlantic—it must have been—for in their open
canoes they entrusted themselves to the stars and the signposts of the
sea and found their way from island to island.

We do not know when the first Polynesian voyages took place. Concerning
the later ones, there is some evidence that the last important
colonizing voyage to the Hawaiian Islands was made in the thirteenth
century, and that about the middle of the fourteenth century a fleet
from Tahiti permanently colonized New Zealand. But again, all these
things were unknown in Europe, and long after the Polynesians had
mastered the art of navigating unknown seas, the European sailors still
regarded the Pillars of Hercules as the gateway to a dreaded sea of
darkness.

Once Columbus had shown the way to the West Indies and the Americas,
once Balboa had seen the Pacific and Magellan had sailed around the
globe, there arose, and long persisted, two new ideas. One concerned the
existence of a northern passage by sea to Asia; the other had to do with
a great southern continent generally believed to lie below the
then-known lands.

Magellan, while sailing through the strait that now bears his name, had
seen land to the south of him through all the thirty-seven days required
for the passage through the strait. At night the lights of many fires
glowed from the shores of this land, which Magellan named Tierra del
Fuego—Land of Fires. He supposed that these were the near shores of
that great land which the theoretical geographers had already decided
should lie to the south.

Many voyagers after Magellan reported land they assumed to be outlying
regions of the sought-for continent, but all proved to be islands. The
locations of some, like Bouvet, were so indefinitely described that they
were found and lost again many times before being definitely fixed on
maps. Kerguelen believed firmly that the bleak, forbidding land he
discovered in 1772 was the Southern Continent and so reported it to the
French government. When, on a later voyage, he learned that he had found
merely another island, Kerguelen unhappily named it ‘Isle of
Desolation.’ Later geographers, however, gave his own name to it.

Discovery of the southern land was one of the objects of Captain Cook’s
voyages, but instead of a continent, he discovered an ocean. By making
an almost complete circumnavigation of the globe in high southern
latitudes, Cook revealed the existence of a stormy ocean running
completely around the earth south of Africa, Australia, and South
America. Perhaps he believed that the islands of the South Sandwich
group were part of the Antarctic mainland, but it is by no means sure
that he was the first to see these or other islands of the Antarctic
Ocean. American sealers had quite possibly been there before him, yet
this chapter of Antarctic exploration contains many blank pages. The
Yankee sealers did not want their competitors to find the rich sealing
grounds, and they kept the details of their voyages secret. Evidently
they had operated in the vicinity of the outer Antarctic islands for
many years before the beginning of the nineteenth century, because most
of the fur seals in these waters had been exterminated by 1820. It was
in this year that the Antarctic continent was first sighted, by Captain
N. B. Palmer in command of the _Hero_, one of a fleet of eight sealers
from Connecticut ports. A century later, explorers were still making
fresh discoveries about the nature of that Southern Continent, dreamed
of by the old geographers, so long searched for, then branded a myth,
and finally established as one of the great continental masses of the
earth.

At the opposite pole, meanwhile, the dream of a northern passage to the
riches of Asia lured one expedition after another into the frozen seas
of the north. Cabot, Frobisher, and Davis sought the passage to the
northwest, failed, and turned back. Hudson was left by a mutinous crew
to die in an open boat. Sir John Franklin set out with the _Erebus_ and
_Terror_ in 1845, apparently entered the labyrinth of Arctic islands by
what later proved a feasible route, but then lost his ships and perished
with all his men. Later rescue ships coming from east and west met in
Melville Sound and thus the Northwest Passage was established.

Meanwhile there had been repeated efforts to find a way to India by
sailing eastward through the Arctic Sea. The Norwegians seem to have
hunted walruses in the White Sea and had probably reached the coasts of
Novaya Zemlya by the time of Ottar; they may have discovered Spitsbergen
in 1194, although this is usually credited to Barents in 1596. The
Russians had hunted seals in the polar seas as early as the sixteenth
century, and whalers began to operate out of Spitsbergen soon after
Hudson, in 1607, called attention to the great number of whales in the
sea between Spitsbergen and Greenland. So at least the threshold of the
ice-filled northern ocean was known when the British and Dutch traders
began their desperate attempt to find a sea road north of Europe and
Asia. There were many attempts, but few got beyond the coasts of Novaya
Zemlya; the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were marked by the
wreckage of hopes as well as of vessels, and by the death of such
brilliant navigators as William Barents under the hardships met by
expeditions ill prepared for arctic winters. Finally the effort was
abandoned. It was not until 1879, after the practical need for such a
passage had largely disappeared, that Baron Nordenskiöld, in the Swedish
_Vega_, passed from Gothenburg to Bering Strait.

So, little by little, through many voyages undertaken over many
centuries, the fog and the frightening obscurity of the unknown were
lifted from all the surface of the Sea of Darkness. How did they
accomplish it—those first voyagers, who had not even the simplest
instruments of navigation, who had never seen a nautical chart, to whom
the modern miracles of loran, radar, and sonic sounding would have been
fantasies beyond belief? Who was the first man to use a mariner’s
compass, and what were the embryonic beginnings of the charts and the
sailing directions that are taken for granted today? None of these
questions can be answered with finality; we know only enough to want to
know more.

Of the methods of those secretive master mariners, the Phoenicians, we
cannot even guess. We have more basis for conjecture about the
Polynesians, for we can study their descendants today, and those who
have done so find hints of the methods that led the ancient colonizers
of the Pacific on their course from island to island. Certainly they
seem to have followed the stars, which burned brightly in the heavens
over those calm Pacific regions, which are so unlike the stormy and
fog-bound northern seas. The Polynesians considered the stars as moving
bands of light that passed across the inverted pit of the sky, and they
sailed toward the stars which they knew passed over the islands of their
destination. All the language of the sea was understood by them: the
varying color of the water, the haze of surf breaking on rocks yet below
the horizon, and the cloud patches that hang over every islet of the
tropic seas and sometimes seem even to reflect the color of a lagoon
within a coral atoll.

Students of primitive navigation believe that the migrations of birds
had meaning for the Polynesians, and that they learned much from
watching the flocks that gathered each year in the spring and fall,
launched out over the ocean, and returned later out of the emptiness
into which they had vanished. Harold Gatty believes the Hawaiians may
have found their islands by following the spring migration of the golden
plover from Tahiti to the Hawaiian chain, as the birds returned to the
North American mainland. He has also suggested that the migratory path
of the shining cuckoo may have guided other colonists from the Solomons
to New Zealand.

Tradition and written records tell us that primitive navigators often
carried with them birds which they would release and follow to land. The
frigate bird or man-of-war bird was the shore-sighting bird of the
Polynesians (even in recent times it has been used to carry messages
between islands), and in the Norse Sagas we have an account of the use
of ‘ravens’ by Floki Vilgerdarson to show him the way to Iceland, ‘since
seafaring men had no loadstone at that time in the north . . . Thence he
sailed out to sea with the three ravens . . . And when he let loose the
first it flew back astern. The second flew up into the air and back to
the ship. The third flew forward over the prow, where they found land.’

In thick and foggy weather, according to repeated statements in the
Sagas, the Norsemen drifted for days without knowing where they were.
Then they often had to rely on observing the flight of birds to judge
the direction of land. The _Landnamabok_ says that on the course from
Norway to Greenland the voyager should keep far enough to the south of
Iceland to have birds and whales from there. In shallow waters it
appears that the Norsemen took some sort of soundings, for the _Historia
Norwegiae_ records that Ingolf and Hjorleif found Iceland ‘by probing
the waves with the lead.’

The first mention of the use of the magnetic needle as a guide to
mariners occurs in the twelfth century after Christ, but as much as a
century later scholars were expressing doubt that sailors would entrust
their lives to an instrument so obviously invented by the devil. There
is fair evidence, however, that the compass was in use in the
Mediterranean about the end of the twelfth century, and in northern
Europe within the next hundred years.

For navigating the known seas, there had been the equivalent of our
modern Sailing Directions for a great many centuries before this. The
_portolano_ and the _peripli_ guided the mariners of antiquity about the
Mediterranean and Black seas. The _portolano_ were harbor-finding
charts, designed to accompany the coast pilots or _peripli_, and it is
not known which of the two was developed first. The _Periplus of Scylax_
is the oldest and most complete of these ancient Coast Pilots that have
survived the hazards of the intervening centuries and are preserved for
us. The chart which presumably accompanied it no longer exists, but the
two were, in effect, a guide to navigation of the Mediterranean in the
fourth or fifth century B.C.

The _periplus_ called _Stadiasmus_, or _circumnavigation of the great
sea_ dates from about the fifth century after Christ but reads
surprisingly like a modern Pilot, giving distances between points, the
winds with which the various islands might be approached, and the
facilities for anchorage or for obtaining fresh water. So for example,
we read, ‘From Hermaea to Leuce Acte, 20 stadia hereby lies a low islet
at a distance of two stadia from the land, there is anchorage for cargo
boats, to be put into with west wind; but by the shore below the
promontory is a wide anchoring-road for all kinds of vessels. Temple of
Apollo, a famous oracle; by the temple there is water.’

Lloyd Brown, in his _Story of Maps_, says that no true mariners’ chart
of the first thousand years after Christ has been preserved or is
definitely known to have existed. This he ascribes to the fact that
early mariners carefully guarded the secrets of how they made their
passages from place to place; that sea charts were ‘keys to empire’ and
a ‘way to wealth’ and as such were secret, hidden documents. Therefore,
because the earliest specimen of such a chart now extant was made by
Petrus Vesconte in 1311 does not mean that many had not existed before
it.

It was a Dutchman who produced the first collection of navigational
charts bound together in book form—Lucas Janssz Waghenaer. The
_Mariner’s Mirror_ of Waghenaer, first published in 1584, covered the
navigation of the western coast of Europe from the Zuyder Zee to Cadiz.
Soon it was issued in several languages. For many years ‘Waggoners’
guided Dutch, English, Scandinavian, and German navigators through
eastern Atlantic waters, from the Canaries to Spitsbergen, for
succeeding editions had extended the areas covered to include the
Shetland and Faroe islands and even the northern coast of Russia as far
as Novaya Zemlya.

In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, under the stimulus of fierce
competition for the wealth of the East Indies, the finest charts were
prepared not by governmental agencies, but by private enterprise. The
East India companies employed their own hydrographers, prepared secret
atlases, and generally guarded their knowledge of the sailing passages
to the East as one of the most precious secrets of their trade. But in
1795 the East India Company’s hydrographer, Alexander Dalrymple, became
official hydrographer to the Admiralty, and under his direction the
British Admiralty began its survey of the coasts of the world from which
the modern Admiralty Pilots stem.

Shortly thereafter a young man joined the United States Navy—Matthew
Fontaine Maury. In only a few years Lieutenant Maury was to make his
influence felt on navigation all over the world, and was to write a
book, _The Physical Geography of the Sea_, which is now considered the
foundation of the science of oceanography. After a number of years at
sea, Maury assumed charge of the Depot of Charts and Instruments—the
forerunner of the present Hydrographic Office—and began a practical
study of winds and currents from the standpoint of the navigator.
Through his energy and initiative a worldwide co-operative system was
organized. Ships’ officers of all nations sent in the logs of their
voyages, from which Maury assembled and organized information, which he
incorporated in navigational charts. In return, the co-operating mariner
received copies of the charts. Soon Maury’s sailing directions were
attracting world notice: he had shortened the passage for American
eastcoast vessels to Rio de Janeiro by 10 days, to Australia by 20 days,
and around the Horn to California by 30 days. The co-operative exchange
of information sponsored by Maury remains in effect today, and the Pilot
Charts of the Hydrographic Office, the lineal descendants of Maury’s
charts, carry the inscription: ‘Founded on the researches of Matthew
Fontaine Maury while serving as a Lieutenant in the United States Navy.’

In the modern Sailing Directions and Coast Pilots now issued by every
maritime nation of the world we find the most complete information that
is available to guide the navigator over the ocean. Yet in these
writings of the sea there is a pleasing blend of modernity and
antiquity, with unmistakable touches by which we may trace their lineage
back to the sailing directions of the sagas or the _peripli_ of the
ancient Mediterranean seamen.

It is surprising, but pleasant, that sailing directions of one and the
same vintage should contain instructions for obtaining position by the
use of loran, and should also counsel the navigator to be guided, like
the Norsemen a millennium ago, by the flight of birds and the behavior
of whales in making land in foggy weather. In the _Norway Pilot_ we read
as follows:

    [Of Jan Mayen Island] The presence of sea fowl in large numbers
    will give an indication of the approach to land and the noise of
    their rookeries may be useful in locating the shore.

    [Of Bear Island] The sea around the islands teems with
    guillemots. These flocks and the direction of their flight on
    approaching, together with the use of the lead, are of great
    value in making the island when it is foggy.

And the ultra-modern _United States Pilot_ for Antarctica says:

    Navigators should observe the bird life, for deductions may
    often be drawn from the presence of certain species. Shags are
    . . . a sure sign of the close proximity of land . . . The snow
    petrel is invariably associated with ice and is of great
    interest to mariners as an augury of ice conditions in their
    course . . . Blowing whales usually travel in the direction of
    open water.

Sometimes the Pilots for remote areas of the sea can report only what
the whalers or sealers or some old-time fisherman has said about the
navigability of a channel or the set of the tidal currents; or they must
include a chart prepared half a century ago by the last vessel to take
soundings in the area. Often they must caution the navigator not to
proceed without seeking information of those having ‘local knowledge.’
In phrases like these we get the feel of the unknown and the mysterious
that never quite separates itself from the sea: ‘It is said that there
was once an island there . . . such information as could be secured from
reports of men with local knowledge . . . their position has been
disputed . . . a bank reported by an old-time sealer.’

So here and there, in a few out-of-the-way places, the darkness of
antiquity still lingers over the surface of the waters. But it is
rapidly being dispelled and most of the length and breadth of the ocean
is known; it is only in thinking of its third dimension that we can
still apply the concept of the Sea of Darkness. It took centuries to
chart the surface of the sea; our progress in delineating the unseen
world beneath it seems by comparison phenomenally rapid. But even with
all our modern instruments for probing and sampling the deep ocean, no
one now can say that we shall ever resolve the last, the ultimate
mysteries of the sea.

In its broader meaning, that other concept of the ancients remains. For
the sea lies all about us. The commerce of all lands must cross it. The
very winds that move over the lands have been cradled on its broad
expanse and seek ever to return to it. The continents themselves
dissolve and pass to the sea, in grain after grain of eroded land. So
the rains that rose from it return again in rivers. In its mysterious
past it encompasses all the dim origins of life and receives in the end,
after, it may be, many transmutations, the dead husks of that same life.
For all at last return to the sea—to Oceanus, the ocean river, like the
ever-flowing stream of time, the beginning and the end.




                                APPENDIX

[1] _The Gray Beginnings, page 4_

Our concept of the age of the earth is constantly undergoing revision as
older and older rocks are discovered and as methods of study are
refined. The oldest rocks now known in North America are in the Canadian
Shield area. Their precise age has not been determined, but some from
Manitoba and Ontario are believed to have been formed about 3 billion
years ago. Even older rocks have been discovered in the Karelia
Peninsula in the U.S.S.R., and in South Africa. Geologists are generally
of the opinion that present concepts of geologic time will be
considerably lengthened in the future. Tentative adjustments of the
length of the various periods have already been made (see chart, pages
10-11) and the age of the Cambrian has been pushed back 100 million
years compared with the dating assigned to it a decade ago. It is in
that immense and shadowy time that preceded the Cambrian, however, that
the greatest uncertainty exists. This is the time of the
pre-fossiliferous rocks. Whatever life may have inhabited the earth
during that time has left few traces, although by indirect evidence we
may infer that life existed in some abundance before its record was
written in the rocks.

By studies of the rocks themselves geologists have established a few
good benchmarks standing out in those vast stretches of time indicated
on the chart as the Proterozoic and Archeozoic Eras. These indicate a
billion-year age for the ancient Grenville Mountains of eastern North
America. Where these rocks are exposed at the surface, as in Ontario,
they contain large amounts of graphite, giving silent testimony to the
abundance of plant life when these rocks were forming, for plants are a
common source of carbon. An age-reading of 1,700,000,000 years has been
obtained in the Penokean Mountains of Minnesota and Ontario, formerly
known to geologists as the Killarney Mountains. The remains of these
once lofty mountains are still to be seen as low, rolling hills. The
discovery of even older rocks in Canada, Russia, and Africa, dating back
more than 3 billion years, suggests that the earth itself may have been
formed about 4½ billion years ago.

[2] _The Sunless Sea, page 38_

Man’s dream of personally exploring the deepest recesses of the sea has
been realized during the past decade. Persistent effort, imaginative
vision, and engineering skill have produced a type of underwater craft
capable of withstanding the enormous stresses imposed by the greatest
depths of the sea and of carrying human observers into these realms that
only a few years ago would have seemed beyond the reach of man.

The pioneer in this area of deep ocean exploration was Professor Auguste
Piccard, the Swiss physicist who had already attained fame through his
ascent into the stratosphere in a balloon. Professor Piccard proposed a
depth-exploring vehicle which, instead of being suspended at the end of
a cable like the bathysphere, would move freely, independent of control
from the surface. Three such bathyscaphes (depth boats) have now been
constructed. Observers ride in a pressure-resisting ball suspended from
a metal envelope containing high-octane gasoline, an extremely light,
almost incompressible fluid. Silos loaded with iron pellets provide
ballast; the pellets are held by electromagnets, to be released by the
touch of a button when the divers are ready to return to the surface.
The first bathyscaphe, provided by the Fonds National de la Recherche
Scientifique, which is the Belgian scientific research fund, was known
as the FNRS-2. (The FNRS-1 was the stratosphere balloon, which the Fund
also provided for Piccard.) The FNRS-2, in experimental unmanned dives,
revealed great promise but also had certain defects which were remedied
in the craft built later. The second bathyscaphe, the FNRS-3, was built
under a treaty between the Belgian and French governments, under the
direction of Piccard and Jacques Cousteau. Before the completion of this
bathyscaphe, Professor Piccard went to Italy to begin the building of a
third bathyscaphe, to be christened _Trieste_.

The FRNS-3 and the _Trieste_ made the history-making descents of the
1950’s that carried man to the deepest parts of the abyss. In September
1953, Professor Piccard and his son Jacques descended in the _Trieste_
to a depth of 10,395 feet in the Mediterranean. This was more than
double the previous record. Then in 1954 two Frenchmen in the FNRS-3,
Georges Houot and Pierre-Henri Willm, penetrated even deeper into the
sea, to depths of 13,287 feet in the open ocean off Dakar on the coast
of Africa. In 1958 the _Trieste_ was purchased from the Piccards by the
United States Office of Naval Research. The following year the _Trieste_
was taken to Guam, in the vicinity of which lies the great Mariana
Trench, in which echo soundings have revealed the deepest hole now known
in any part of the ocean. On January 23, 1960, manned by Jacques Piccard
and Don Walsh, the _Trieste_ descended to the bottom of this trench,
35,800 feet (or nearly seven miles) beneath the surface.

[3] _The Sunless Sea, page 44_

Even today the mystery of the scattering layer has not been completely
resolved. Through an ingenious combination of new techniques, however,
the picture is gradually becoming clearer. It now appears that at least
in some areas—as over the continental shelf off New England—fishes may
compose a substantial part of the layer. This has been determined by
studying it with a sound source that embraces many frequencies (the
ordinary echo sounder is a single-frequency device). This method not
only reveals the vertical migration but brings out the fact that the
very nature of the scattering changes with depth. Such changes are best
interpreted as originating in the swim bladders of fishes, which are
compressed under the increasing pressure of a descent into deeper levels
of the sea but which expand with ascent toward the surface and
consequent lessening of pressure. The formerly held objection that
fishes could not possibly be abundant enough to account for the very
widespread occurrence of the scattering layer has melted away in the
light of information new techniques have given us. It was formerly
supposed that a strong echo implied a very dense concentration of
whatever creatures were returning the echo. Now it is realized that the
tracings recorded by the echo sounder do not necessarily indicate the
density of the animals in the scattering layer, so that actually a dark
tracing on the record may be produced by only a few strong scatterers
passing through the beam in any particular instant of time.

One of the study methods increasingly used during the 1950’s was an
underwater camera correlated with an echo sounder. All pictures of
fishes so obtained have been accompanied by strong echoes. None of these
findings rule out the possibility that other organisms may also help to
compose the scattering layer. They do furnish rather convincing evidence
that fishes compose an important part of a phenomenon that, in all
probability, lends itself to no single explanation, but varies as to the
species composing it over the vast areas of the ocean.

[4] _The Sunless Sea, page 45_

In 1957 Bruce C. Heezen of the Lamont Geological Observatory published a
fascinating compilation of fourteen instances of whales entangled in
submarine cables between 1877 and 1955. Ten of these accidents occurred
off the Pacific coast of Central and South America, two in the South
Atlantic, one in the North Atlantic, and one in the Persian Gulf. All
entanglements involved sperm whales and it is possible the concentration
of reports off the coasts of Ecuador and Peru may be related to a
seasonal migration of these whales. The greatest depth at which a whale
was found entangled was 620 fathoms or nearly two-thirds of a mile. More
whales were trapped by cables at about 500 fathoms than at any other
depth, suggesting that the natural food of the sperm whale may be
concentrated at about this level. Two significant details were observed
in most of these cases: the entanglement occurred near the site of
earlier repairs where slack cable lay on the bottom, and the cable was
usually wrapped around the whale’s jaw. Heezen suggests that as a whale
skims along the ocean bottom in search of food its lower jaw may become
entangled in a slack loop of cable lying on the bottom. The struggles of
the whale to free itself could easily result in its complete
entanglement in the cable.

[5] _The Sunless Sea, page 52_

For years people have speculated as to the function served by sound
production on the part of marine species. It has been known for at least
20 years that the bat finds its way about in lightless caves and on dark
nights by means of a physiological equivalent of radar, emitting a
stream of high-frequency sound, which returns to it as echoes from any
obstructions in its path. Could the sounds produced by certain fishes
and marine mammals serve a similar purpose, aiding inhabitants of deep
waters to swim in darkness and to find prey? Among the early tape
recordings of underwater sound obtained by the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution was a recording of some mysterious calls that emanated from
waters so deep as surely to be lightless. They were distinguished by the
fact that each call was followed by a faint echo of itself, so that for
want of a better name the unknown author of these eerie sounds was
christened the “echo fish.” Actual evidence of anything similar to the
bat’s echo location or echo ranging has come only recently in the form
of ingenious experiments performed on captive porpoises by W. N. Kellogg
of Florida State University. Dr. Kellogg finds that the porpoises emit
streams of underwater sound pulses by which they are able to swim
accurately through a field of obstructions without collision. They could
do this in water too turbid for vision or in darkness. When the
experimenters introduced any object into the tank the porpoises gave
forth bursts of sound signals by which the animals appeared to be trying
to locate the object. Splashing on the surface, as from a hose or a
shower of rain, “produced great disturbance, loud sound signals,
undulating porpoise ‘alarm’ whistles, and ‘flight’ swimming reactions.”
When food fish were introduced into the tank under such circumstances
that they could not be located visually, the porpoises located them by
streams of sound signals, turning their heads to right and left as the
returning echoes allowed them to fix the exact location of their target.

[6] _The Sunless Sea, page 53_

Latimeria was identified as a coelacanth, or one of an incredibly
ancient group of fishes that first appeared in the seas some 300 million
years ago. Rocks representing the next 200 million and more years of
earth history yielded fossil coelacanths; then, in the Cretaceous, the
record of these fishes came to an end. The reappearance of a coelacanth
as a live fish off South Africa was at first considered a mysterious and
extraordinary incident, not likely to be repeated. An ichthyologist in
South Africa, Professor J. L. B. Smith, did not share this view.
Believing there must be other coelacanths in the sea, he began a patient
search that went on 14 years before it was successful. Then, in December
1952, a second fish of this group was captured near the island of
Anjouan, off the northwestern tip of Madagascar. The search was then
taken up by Professor J. Millot, Director of the Research Institute in
Madagascar. By 1958 Professor Millot had obtained ten more specimens,
consisting of seven males and three females.

A plausible explanation of the sixty-million-year gap in the occurrence
of fossil coelacanths has been put forward by Dr. Bobb Schaeffer of the
American Museum of Natural History. Dr. Schaeffer points out that the
earliest coelacanths, from pre-Jurassic time, seem to have inhabited a
variety of environments, including fresh water swamps as well as seas.
From the Jurassic to the present time, on the other hand, they seem to
have been exclusively marine. At the close of the Cretaceous, the great
withdrawal of the sea from the continental areas it had overflowed may
have confined the coelacanths to the permanent ocean basins. There, in
the bottom sediments, their fossils would be so inaccessible that the
chance of their discovery would be exceedingly remote.

[7] _Hidden Lands, page 55_

The range of echo-sounding instruments has now been so greatly extended
that under ideal conditions the most powerful of them are capable of
sounding the maximum depths of the sea. Factors such as the nature of
the underlying bottom and conditions in the intervening water layers
influence the effectiveness with which the sounding devices operate
under actual conditions at sea. Nevertheless, the potential range
necessary for charting all parts of the sea is now at the command of
oceanographers.

[8] _Hidden Lands, page 59_

In the ten years that have elapsed since this account of the canyons was
written much more has been learned about them, but it may still be said
that there is no general agreement about their origin. Many of the
resources of the modern oceanographer have been brought to bear on the
problem. Divers have engaged in direct exploration of the shallow heads
of some of the California canyons, collecting samples of their walls and
photographing them. Other canyons have been studied by oceanographers
using deep-sea corers or dredges to obtain samples of rocks and
sediments. Precision depth recorders have given much new information
about their shapes. As a result of these studies it is now known that
there are at least five types of canyons, so different in their
characteristics that almost certainly they have different origins. No
single theory may be expected to explain all of them. Professor Francis
S. Shepard, the marine geologist who originally put forward the theory
that the canyons had been cut by rivers and later submerged, now feels
this explanation is adequate for some canyons but not for others. For
example, some marine valleys, trough-shaped and straight-walled and
occurring in areas where the earth’s crust is in a state of unrest,
probably represent a fault or fracture of the rocky floor. The theory
that some of the canyons have been cut by vast sediment flows called
turbidity currents has gained support as a result of new concepts of
dynamic activity on the floor of the sea. Further detailed study of all
types of these extraordinarily fascinating features of the sea floor
should not only clarify their own history but add greatly to our
understanding of the history of the earth.

[9] _Hidden Lands, page 61_

Somewhat greater depths have more recently been recorded in the Mariana
Trench off the island of Guam, the trench into which the bathyscaphe
_Trieste_ made its record-breaking descent to the bottom. In this trench
the _Challenger_ in 1951 recorded a depth of 10,863 meters or about 6.7
miles. Since the exact location of the _Challenger_ echo sounding was
given, this depth is capable of verification and so is regarded as the
maximum depth of which we have authentic record. In 1958, however,
Russian scientists aboard the _Vitiaz_ reported a finding of slightly
greater depths (11,034 meters or 6.8 miles) also in the Mariana Trench,
but at an unspecified location.

[10] _Hidden Lands, page 63_

The supposition that the Atlantic Ridge may extend across the Arctic
basin has been confirmed in exciting new developments in marine geology.
Indeed, it is now suggested by some geologists that the whole
mid-Atlantic ridge is part of a continuous range of mountains that runs
for 40,000 miles across the bottom of the Atlantic, the Arctic, the
Pacific, and the Indian Oceans (see Preface).

As for the exploration of the Arctic basin itself—the charting of
details so long unknown and merely guessed at—the revolutionary
development that made it possible to substitute fact for theory was the
use of American nuclear-powered submarines to pass beneath the ice cover
and directly explore the depths of this ocean. In 1957 the _Nautilus_
(bearing the same name as Wilkin’s conventional submarine) first
penetrated beneath Arctic ice in a preliminary exploration designed to
discover whether it was feasible to explore these regions by submarines.
The _Nautilus_ remained submerged for 74 hours and covered a distance of
almost 1000 miles. A vast amount of data was collected, including depth
soundings and measurements of the thickness of the overlying ice. Then
in 1958 the _Nautilus_ crossed the entire Arctic basin from Point Barrow
in Alaska to the North Pole and thence to the Atlantic. In the course of
this historic voyage it made the first continuously recorded echo
sounder profile across the center of the Arctic basin. Other nuclear
submarines have subsequently contributed to our knowledge of the Arctic.
It is now clear, from the work of the nuclear submarines and from other,
more conventional explorations, that the bottom topography of the Arctic
Ocean is for the most part that of a normal oceanic basin, with flat
abyssal plains, scattered sea mounts, and rugged mountains. The greatest
depth so far discovered is somewhat more than three miles. The shelf
break (from which a steeper descent begins) falls at the unusually
shallow depth of 35 fathoms off Alaska. From samplings by coring tubes
and dredges and from deep-sea photography it was discovered during the
International Geophysical Year that the bottom is widely covered with
rocks, pebbles, and shells, the latter chiefly of shallow-water forms.
The present ice cover seems to be carrying little or no material such as
rock fragments and sand, so the material now found in bottom samples
must have come from ice rafted in from surrounding continents during
some past geologic time, when the Arctic was relatively open water.

Russian scientists, who have done rather extensive work in marine
biology, obtained interesting data which seem to disprove Nansen’s
earlier belief that the waters of the central Arctic are extremely poor
in both plant and animal life. Data collected from the drifting station
“North Pole” indicate that both plant and animal plankton in great
variety exist in the region of the Pole. Little-studied organisms
develop on the surface of the ice; these contain much fat and tint the
ice shades of yellow and red. Diatoms are not found on the surface of
the ice but develop (along with other plankton) in the lakes that form
on the surface of the ice as it melts. By absorbing a great amount of
energy from the sun, the abundant diatom colonies contribute to further
melting of the ice cover. The wealth of plankton during the Arctic
summer attracts numbers of birds and various mammals.

[11] _The Long Snowfall, page 75_

Now that the sediments have been measured over much greater areas of the
ocean floor, the reaction of oceanographers is one of considerable
amazement—but their surprise concerns the fact that on the whole the
mantle of sediments is so much thinner than related facts would lead
them to expect. Over vast areas of the Pacific the average thickness of
the sediments (unconsolidated sediments plus sedimentary rock) is only
about a quarter of a mile. It is little thicker over much of the
Atlantic. (These are average figures; some much deeper deposits of
course exist.) In some areas there has been almost no sedimentation. A
few years ago several oceanographers obtained photographs of manganese
nodules lying on the floor of the Atlantic at great depths and of others
on the Easter Island Ridge of the southeast Pacific. Sharks’ teeth
dating from the Tertiary, hence possibly as much as 70 million years
old, sometimes form the nuclei of these nodules. Certainly their growth,
by deposit of successive layers around these nuclei, must be very slow.
Hans Pettersson has estimated a growth of about 1 mm. per thousand
years. Yet during the period these nodules have lain on the ocean floor,
sediments deep enough to cover them have not been accumulated.

Some idea of the rate of sedimentation during post-glacial time has been
gained by observation of the rate of radioactive decay of some of the
components of the sediments. If this sedimentation rate had prevailed
during the supposed life of the oceans, the average thickness of the
sediments would be enormously greater than it now appears to be. Did
much of the deposited sediments dissolve? Were most of the present land
masses submerged for far greater periods than we now assume, with
consequently long periods of slight erosion? These and other
explanations of the mystery of the sediments have been suggested, but
none seems wholly satisfying. Possibly the dramatic project of boring
holes in the floor of the ocean down to the Mohorovicic discontinuity
(Project Mohole; see Preface) will provide the explanation that is now
lacking.

[12] _Wind and Water, page 123_

From the time of its establishment up to 1960, the warning system has
issued eight alerts warning residents of the Hawaiian Islands of the
approach of seismic waves. On three of these occasions, waves of major
proportions have in fact struck the islands. None have been so large or
so destructive, however, as those of May 23, 1960, which spread out
across the Pacific from their place of origin in violent earthquakes on
the coast of Chile. Without such warning the loss of life would almost
certainly have been enormous. As soon as the seismograph at the Honolulu
Observatory recorded the first of the Chilean quakes the system went
into operation. Reports from the scattered tide stations gave ample
notice that a seismic wave had formed and was spreading out across the
Pacific. By early news bulletins and later by an official “sea wave
warning” the Observatory alerted residents of the area and predicted the
time the wave would arrive and the areas to be affected. These
predictions proved to be accurate within reasonable limits, and although
property damage was heavy, loss of life was limited to the few who
disregarded the warnings. Sea wave activity was reported as far west as
New Zealand and as far north as Alaska. The Japanese coasts were struck
by heavy waves. Although the United States warning system does not now
include other nations, officials at Honolulu sent to Japan warnings of
the wave which, unfortunately, were disregarded.

The warning system now (in 1960) consists of eight seismograph stations
at points on both eastern and western shores of the Pacific and on
certain islands, and of twenty widely scattered wave stations, four of
which are equipped with automatic wave detectors. The Coast and Geodetic
Survey feels that additional wave-reporting tide stations would improve
the effectiveness of the system. Its principal defect now, however, is
the fact that it is not possible to predict the height of a wave as it
reaches any particular shore, and therefore the same alert must be
issued for all approaching seismic waves. Research on methods of
forecasting wave height is therefore needed. Even with its present
limitations, however, the system has filled so great a need that there
is strong international interest in extending it to other parts of the
world.

[13] _Wind and Water, page 124_

The flood of ocean waters that overwhelmed the coast of the Netherlands
on February 1, 1953, deserves a place in the history of great storm
waves. A winter gale that formed west of Iceland swept across the
Atlantic and into the North Sea. All its force was ultimately brought to
bear on the first land mass to obstruct the course of its center—the
southwestern corner of Holland. The storm-driven waves and tides
battered against the dikes in such bitter violence that these ancient
defenses were breached in a hundred places, through which the flood
rushed in to inundate farms and villages. The storm struck on Saturday,
January 31, and by midday of Sunday one-eighth of Holland was under
water. The toll included about half a million acres of Holland’s best
agricultural land—ravaged by water and permeated with salt—thousands
of buildings, hundreds of thousands of live stock, and an estimated 1400
people. In all the long history of Holland’s struggle against the sea,
there has been no comparable assault by ocean waters.

[14] _Hidden Lands, page 135_

It is now the fashion among oceanographers to speak of the Gulf Stream
System, reflecting the discovery that east of Cape Hatteras there is no
longer a continuous river of warm water but a “series of overlapping
currents arranged somewhat like the shingles on a roof.” Not only do the
streams “overlap” but they are narrow and swift. The main branches of
the stream that have long been recognized east of the Grand Banks are
now known to originate far to westward of the Banks, developing not as
branches in the ordinary sense but as a series of new currents, each to
the north of the next older one.

As oceanographers study more about the dynamics of circulation in the
sea, they are more and more struck by parallels between the ocean of
water and the ocean of air. One of the leading students of the Gulf
Stream, Columbus Iselin, has commented on the branching of the Stream in
terms of a fascinating analogy: “Much the same phenomena seem to be
present in the jet streams found at high elevations in the great belts
of prevailing westerly winds of mid-latitudes,” he says, “although each
atmospheric jet has greater dimensions than the overlapping subdivision
of the Gulf Stream System.”

[15] _Wind, Sun, and the Spinning of the Earth, page 136_

One of the most exciting recent events in oceanography was the discovery
of a powerful current running under the South Equatorial current but in
the opposite direction. The core of the counter-current lies about 300
feet below the surface (although shallower near its eastern terminal in
the vicinity of the Galapagos Islands). This subsurface current is about
250 miles wide and it flows at least 3500 miles eastward along the
equator at a speed of about 3 knots. (The speed of the surface current
is only about one knot.) The existence of the current was discovered in
1952 by Townsend Cromwell in the course of a U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service investigation of methods of tuna fishing. Cromwell observed that
long lines set for tuna at the equator did not move westward with the
surface current, as would be expected, but drifted rapidly in the
opposite direction. It was not until 1958, however, that an extensive
survey of the current was made by the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography and its impressive dimensions measured. This same survey
gave further proof that the deep circulation of the ocean is far more
complicated than has generally been realized, for beneath the
swift-flowing eastward current was still another, flowing to the west.
In only the uppermost half mile of Pacific equatorial waters, therefore,
there are three great rivers of water, one above the other, each flowing
on its own course independent of the other. When such surveys can be
extended all the way to the floor of the ocean an even more complex
picture will undoubtedly be revealed.

Only a year before the detailed charting of this Pacific current,
British and American oceanographers discovered a south-flowing
counter-current running from the North to the South Atlantic under the
Gulf Stream and the Brazil Current. The techniques that make such
discoveries possible have only very recently become available to
oceanographers. As their use becomes more widespread our almost complete
ignorance of the deep circulation of the ocean will be dispelled.

[16] _The Global Thermostat, page 166_

During the 1950’s enormous advances were made in the development of
instruments for the recording of water temperatures. A continuous
recording of water temperatures to a depth of several hundred feet may
be obtained by towing a thermistor chain behind a vessel. The electronic
bathythermograph is potentially capable of obtaining temperatures at any
depth, depending on the length of cable available. It is a vast
improvement over the original bathythermograph because a recorder on
deck traces a continuous graph of the temperatures being registered
while the vessel is under way. An even more revolutionary development in
the study of sea temperatures is the airborne radiation thermometer
which, while flown above the sea, registers the surface temperature with
an accuracy of a fraction of a degree. Oceanographers regard this
instrument as still in the developmental stage, with further refinement
of accuracy possible. However, in such work as tracing the edge of the
Gulf Stream these airborne thermometers have already proven themselves
enormously useful. During a 1960 survey of the Gulf Stream conducted by
the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, a low-flying plane covered
some 30,000 miles, obtaining surface temperatures in various areas of
the Stream.




                   SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING[N]

_General Information About the Ocean and Its Life._

    Bigelow, Henry B. and Edmonson, W. T. _Wind Waves at Sea,
    Breakers and Surf_, U.S. Navy, Hydrographic Office Pub. no. 602,
    Washington, U.S. Government Printing Office, 1947. 177 pp.
    _Extremely readable; full of interesting and practical
    information about waves at sea and along coasts._

    Johnson, Douglas W. _Shore Processes and Shoreline Development._
    New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1919. 584 pp. _Primarily for
    geologists and engineers concerned with shoreline changes, yet
    the chapter, The Work of Waves, is unmatched for sheer
    interest._ Out of print.

    Marmer, H. A. _The Tide._ New York, D. Appleton and Co., 1926.
    282 pp. _In this book the late outstanding American authority on
    tidal phenomena explains the complex behavior of the tides._ Out
    of print.

    Maury, Matthew Fontaine. _Physical Geography of the Sea._ New
    York, Harper and Brothers, 1855. 287 pp. _Marks the foundation
    of the science of oceanography, as the first book to consider
    the sea as a dynamic whole._ Out of print.

    Murray, Sir John, and Hjort, Johan. _The Depths of the Ocean._
    London, Macmillan, 1912. 822 pp. _Based chiefly on the work of
    the Norwegian research vessel_ Michael Sars _in the North
    Atlantic, this work was for many years the bible of
    oceanography._ It is now out of print and copies are rare.

    Ommaney, F. D. _The Ocean._ London. Oxford University Press,
    1949. 238 pp. _A thoughtful and pleasantly written account of
    the ocean and its life, for the general reader._

    Russell, F. S. and Yonge C. M. _The Seas._ London, Frederick
    Warne and Co., 1928. 379 pp. _Written chiefly from the
    biological point of view, this is one of the best general
    treatments of the subject._

    Sverdrup, H. U., Fleming, Richard, and Johnson, Martin W. _The
    Oceans._ New York, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1942. 1087 pp. _The
    standard modern textbook of oceanography._

Some of the most rewarding sources of information about the sea are the
Sailing Directions of the U. S. Hydrographic Office (for waters outside
of the United States) and the Coast Pilots of the U. S. Coast and
Geodetic Survey (for United States shores). Besides giving detailed
accounts of the coastlines and coastal waters of the world, these books
are repositories of fascinating information on icebergs and sea ice,
storms, and fog at sea. Some approach the character of regional
geographies. Those dealing with remote and inaccessible coasts are
especially interesting. They may be purchased from the issuing agency.
The British Admiralty publishes a similar series, as do the appropriate
authorities of most maritime nations.

_Sea Life in Relation to Its Surroundings._

    Hardy, Alister. _The Open Sea._ Part I, The World of Plankton.
    Boston, Houghton Mifflin Co., 1956. 335 pp. Part II, Fish and
    Fisheries, Boston, Houghton Mifflin Co., 1959. 322 pp. _A
    two-part study of marine biology, describing first the
    little-known creatures of the true sea world beyond the coastal
    areas, and then the fishes that depend on them._

    Hesse, Richard, Allee, W. C., and Schmidt, Karl P. _Ecological
    Animal Geography._ New York, John Wiley and Sons (2nd Ed.,
    1951). 597 pp. _This is an excellent source of information on
    the intricate relations of living things to their environment,
    with profuse references to source material. About a fourth of
    the book is concerned with marine animals._

    Murphy, Robert Cushman. _Oceanic Birds of South America._ New
    York, Macmillan, 1948. 1245 pp. 2 vols. (originally issued by
    American Museum of Natural History, 1936). _Highly recommended
    for an understanding of the relation of birds to the sea and of
    marine organisms to their environment. It describes little-known
    shores and islands in extremely readable prose, and contains an
    extensive bibliography._ Out of print.

    Wallace, Alfred Russell. _Island Life._ London, Macmillan, 1880.
    526 pp. _Deals in interesting fashion with the basic biology of
    island life._ Out of print.

    Yonge, C. M. _The Sea Shore._ London, Collins, 1949. 311 pp.
    _For the general reader, a charming and authoritative account of
    the life of the shore; based chiefly on British localities._ Out
    of print.

    Ricketts, E. F. and Calvin, Jack. _Between Pacific Tides._
    Stanford, Stanford University Press, 1948. 365 pp. _An ideal
    companion for exploring American Pacific shores._

_Exploration and Discovery._

    Babcock, William H. _Legendary Islands of the Atlantic; a study
    in medieval geography._ New York, American Geographical Society,
    1922. 385 pp. _Deals with early exploration of the sea and the
    search for distant lands._ Out of print.

    Beebe, William. _Half Mile Down._ New York, Harcourt Brace,
    1934. 344 pp. _Stands alone as a vivid eyewitness account of the
    sea half a mile below the surface._

    Brown, Lloyd A. _The Story of Maps._ Boston, Little, Brown,
    1940. 397 pp. _Contains, especially in the chapter, The Haven
    Finding Art, much of interest about early voyages._

    Challenger Staff. _Report on the Scientific Results of the
    Exploring Voyage of H. M. S. Challenger, 1873-76._ 40 vols. _See
    especially volume 1, parts 1 and 2—Narrative of the
    Cruise—which gives an interesting account of this historic
    expedition. Consult in libraries._

    Cousteau, Jacques-Yves and Frederic Dumas. _The Silent World._
    New York, Harper and Brothers, 1953. 288 pp. _A fascinating book
    in which the reader shares Cousteau’s long and remarkable
    experience undersea._

    Darwin, Charles. _The Diary of the Voyage of_ H. M. S. Beagle.
    Edited from the manuscript by Nora Barlow. Cambridge, Cambridge
    University Press, 1934. 451 pp. _A fresh and charming account,
    as Darwin actually set it down in the course of the Beagle
    voyage._

    Dugan, James. _Man Under the Sea._ New York, Harper and
    Brothers, 1956. 332 pp. _An interesting and useful account of
    man’s explorations undersea during the past 5000 years._

    Heyerdahl, Thor. _Kon-Tiki._ Chicago, Rand McNally & Co., 1950.
    304 pp. _The Odyssey of six modern Vikings who crossed the
    Pacific on a primitive raft—one of the great books of the sea._

_History of Earth and Sea._

    Brooks, C. E. P. _Climate Through the Ages._ New York,
    McGraw-Hill, 1949. 395 pp. _Interprets clearly and readably the
    climatic changes of past ages._ Out of print.

    Coleman, A. P. _Ice Ages, Recent and Ancient._ New York,
    Macmillan 1926. 296 pp. _An account of Pleistocene glaciation,
    and also of earlier glacial epochs._ Out of print.

    Daly, Reginald. _The Changing World of the Ice Age._ New Haven,
    Yale University Press, 1934. 271 pp. _A fresh, stimulating, and
    vigorous treatment of the subject, more easily read, however,
    against some background of geology._ Out of print.

    _Our Mobile Earth._ New York, Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1926. 342
    pp. _For the general reader; an excellent picture of the earth’s
    continuing development._ Out of print.

    Hussey, Russell C. _Historical Geology: The Geological History
    of North America._ New York and London, McGraw-Hill, 1947. 465
    pp. Out of print.

    Miller, William J. _An Introduction to Historical Geology, with
    Special Reference to North America._ New York, D. Van Nostrand
    Co., 6th Ed. 1952. 499 pp.

    Schuchert, Charles, and Dunbar, Carl O. _Outlines of Historical
    Geology._ New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1941. 291 pp. _Any one
    of these three books will give the general reader a good
    conception of this fascinating subject; the treatment by the
    various authors differs enough that all may be read with
    profit._

    Shepard, Francis P. _Submarine Geology._ New York, Harper and
    Brothers, 1948. 348 pp. The first textbook in a field which is
    still in the pioneering stages.

_Outstanding Sea Prose._

These books are listed because each, in one way or another, captures the
sea’s varied and always changing moods; all are among my own favorite
volumes.

    Beston, Henry. _The Outermost House: A Year of Life on the Great
    Beach of Cape Cod._ New York, Rinehart and Company, 1949. 222
    pp.

    Conrad, Joseph. _The Mirror of the Sea._ New York, Doubleday,
    Anchor Books, 1960. 304 pp. (Combined with Conrad’s _A Personal
    Record_.)

    Hughes, Richard. _In Hazard._ New York, Harper and Brothers,
    1938. 279 pp. (also published by Penguin Books, 1943).

    Melville, Herman. _Moby Dick._ Available in many editions, as
    Modern Library, New American Library, Pocket Books.

    Nordhoff, Charles, and Hall, James Norman. _Men Against the
    Sea._ Boston, Little, Brown, 1934. 251 pp. (also published by
    Pocket Books, 1946).

    Tomlinson, H. M. _The Sea and the Jungle._ New York, Modern
    Library. 1928. 332 pp. _Paper: Dutton_ (Everyman).

-----

[N] Many of the old basic works on the sea are now out of print but they
are well worth pursuing in libraries for the excellent background they
provide.




                                 INDEX

Abyss, _see_ Deep Sea
Adam of Bremen, 200
‘Adam’s Bridge,’ 102
Admiralty Pilots, 207
Adriatic Sea, 102
Africa, 21, 96, 109, 139, 143, 180, 211
Agassiz, Louis, 104
Ahlmann, Hans, 179
Air currents, _see_ Currents, air
Akun Strait, 152-153
Akutan Pass, 152
Alaska, 179
_Alaska Pilot_, 152-153
_Albatross_, 60, 73, 74
_Albatross III_, 127
Albatrosses, 22, 90
Aleutian Islands, 61, 83-84, 122, 152
Aleutian Trench, 121
Alewives, 31
Alfred, King, 198
Algae, 8, 19, 20, 25, 30-31
Algeria, 139
_All America_, 45
Alsace, 189
Amazon River, 154
Amber, 175, 196, 198
Amphibians, 13, 85
Anak Krakatoa, 83
Andes Mountains, 180
Animals, and climate, 178-179
  first, 8
  on islands, 85-93
  land, 9, 12-13, 14
  sea, _see_ Marine life
Antarctica, 100, 169, 170, 208
Antarctic Current, 135, 136
Antarctic Ocean, 57, 76, 129, 143, 202
Arabian Sea, 139
Architeuthis, 45
Arctic Current, 23, 24
Arctic Sea, 57, 62-63, 98, 143, 165, 169-170, 176-178, 192, 217
Army Corps of Engineers, 109
Arrowworms, 19, 48
Arthropods, 8, 12
Ascension Island, 65, 81, 125
Ascidians, 184
Asia, 96, 97, 177, 180, 201, 202-203
_Askoy_, 138
Atacama Desert, 168
Atacama Trench, 121
Atlantic Ocean, 23-24, 26, 165, 199-200, 217
  and climate, 168-180 passim
  currents, 23, 24, 129-135, 141-142, 143, 164, 180
  islands, 80, 81, 82, 84-85, 92, 101, 125
  level of, 94, 95-96
  salt in, 20-21
  sediment in, 72, 74, 76-78
  tides, 144, 146, 147, 148-149, 155
  topography, 59, 60-65
  waves, 107-108, 109, 111-112, 114, 117-118, 122, 125
  winds, 164
Atlantic Ridge, 60, 63-65, 66, 68, 73, 74-75, 217
_Atlantis_, 50, 60, 63, 73
Atlantis, island of, 67-68
Auks, 22, 31
Avienus, 197
Azores, 64

Balboa, Vasco Nuñez, 209
Baltic Sea, 95, 165, 167, 171-173, 175, 196
Barbados, 61
Barents, William, 203
Barents Sea, 22, 31, 57, 95, 165, 176-177, 179, 198
Barnacles, 19, 155
Barton, Otis, 38
Bat, 85
Bathyscaphes, 212
Bathysphere, 38, 44
Bathythermograph, 222
Bay of Bengal, 124
Bay of Biscay, 197
Bay of Fundy, 114, 144, 146, 147, 148, 152
_Beagle_, H.M.S., 19-20, 34
Beebe, William, 38, 44
Bell Rock Light, 118
Benguela Current, 22, 135, 169
Benthoscope, 38
Bering Sea, 32, 41, 84, 95, 152
Bering Strait, 102
Bermuda, 21, 24, 77, 79, 100, 143
Birds, and climate, 178
  first, 123
  on islands, 85, 87-93
  and navigation, 204-205, 208
  polar, 23-24
  sea, 19, 22, 23-24, 42, 85, 89, 90, 137
  and seasons, 31, 32
  tropical, 23, 24
Bishop Rock Light, 118
Black Current, 135
Black Sea, 191, 192
Bluefish, 19
Bogoslof, island of, 84
Borax, 190
Bore of Duncansby, 113
Bores, 154-155
Boron, 183
Bouvet, island of, 65
Brazil Current, 135, 222
_British Islands Pilot_, 113, 117
British Isles, 96, 102
Bromine, 186-187, 190
Brooks, C. E. P., 165, 181
Brooks, S. C., 23-24
Brown, Lloyd, 206
Bryce, Lord, 116
_Bulldog_, 39

Cabot, John, 202
Caisson disease, 46
Calcium, 183
Cambrian period, 9, 10-11, 13, 52, 128, 211
Canada, 9
Canary Current, 135
Canyons, 58-59, 104, 216
Cap Breton Canyon, 59
Cape Cod, 21, 119
_Cape Johnson_, U.S.S., 63
Capelin, 31
Cape of Good Hope, 101
Cape Race, 163
Capes, 134
Caribbean Sea, 192
Carnallite, 189
Caspian Sea, 192
Castle Rock, 84
Caves, 98, 101, 102-103, 120-121
Cenozoic period, 58
Ceylon, 102
Chalk cliffs, 97-98
_Challenger_, H.M.S., 39, 52, 85, 135
Charts, 205-207
Charybdis, 144
Chesapeake Bay, 95, 146
China Sea, 95
Chinooks, 31
Chloride, 183
Chlorine, 183
Chlorophyll, 7-78
Christensen, R. J., 40
Chuckchee Sea, 41
Cliffs, 120, 121
Climate, 163-181
_Climatic Variations in Historic and Prehistoric Time_, 173
Clocks, 152
Coalfish, 178-179
Coast and Geodetic Survey, 94, 123, 147
Coast Pilots, 205-206, 207, 208
Coasts, _see_ Shorelines
Cobalt, 185
Cod, 18, 31, 36, 178-179
Coelacanth, 215
Coker, Dr. Robert E., 137
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 127
Columbus, Christopher, 26, 200, 201
Composite family, 87
Congress, U.S., 103-104
Conrad, Joseph, 35
Continental shelf, 29, 37, 55-56, 193, 218
Continental slope, 55, 56, 57-59, 126
Continents, and climate, 168
  and currents, 128, 140
  history, 6, 8, 52, 73, 99
  life on, 8, 9, 12-15, 52, 85
  ‘lost,’ 67-70
  submerged, 95-104, 188-189, 190
  _see also_ Earth, Erosion, _and_ Mountains
_Convoluta roscoffensis_, 158-159
Cook, Captain James, 91, 202
Copenhagen, National Museum of, 174
Copenhagen Zoological Museum, 179
Copepods, 18, 22, 30, 34, 35, 44
Copper, 185
Corals, 8, 21, 74, 183, 186
Cores, 72-73, 77-78
Cormorant, flightless, 89
Cotteau (naturalist), 88
Cousteau, Jacques, 212
Crabs, 12, 19
Cretaceous period, 96, 97-98, 99, 100, 131, 193, 215, 216
Cromwell, Townsend, 221
Crustaceans, 19
Cultivator Shoals, 114
Currents, air, 87;
  _see also_ Winds
  ocean, 22-24, 75, 127-145, 163-181, 221, 222
Cyanea, 31

_Daisy_, 90
Dalrymple, Alexander, 207
Daly, Professor R. A., 61-62, 103, 104
Danish Archaeological Expedition, 174
Darwin, Charles, 19, 34, 85, 88, 89, 116
Davis, John, 202
Day, length of, 151-152
Dead Sea, 187, 190
‘Dead water,’ 126
Deep sea, 46-52
  exploring, 37-41, 43-44, 213
  floor, 22, 55, 59-67, 71-78, 80, 100, 121, 219
  life, 39-53, 126
  pressure, 46-48, 76
  and undersea waves, 126
Depth charges, 73
‘Descent into the Maelstrom,’ 153
Deserts, 77, 96, 168-169, 188, 189
Devonian period, 13, 96, 128
Diatoms, 17, 18, 19, 29, 30, 31, 36, 76, 183, 218
Dinoflagellates, 33
Diving, 37-38, 46
Dodo, 89
Dogger Bank, 56, 68-70
Dolomite, 98, 187
Dover, white cliffs of, 97-98
Druids, 175
Dunnet Head, 119
D’Urville, Dumont, 115

Earth, age, 4, 211
  crust, 4-9 passim, 37, 66, 74, 99, 182
  and currents, 128-129, 131-134, 140
  density, 5
  history, 3-15, 99, 150-151
  rotation, 128-129, 131-134, 140, 151
  and tides, 151-152
Earthquakes, 63, 66, 110, 121-123
East Greenland Current, 164, 165
East India Company, 206-207
Echo ranging, 215
Echo sounding, 39-41, 55, 213, 217
Eddas, 175
Eddystone Light, 118
Edrisi (geographer), 200
Elbe River, 102
Elements, 185;
  _see also_ Minerals
El Niño Current, 169
Elysian fields, 195
English Channel, 102, 118
Equatorial currents, 17, 84, 128, 129-130, 131, 135, 136, 139, 140, 141,
  163, 164, 221-222
_Erebus_, 54, 203
Eric the Red, 173-174
Erosion, 6-7, 9, 71-72, 75, 99, 109, 119-121, 182
Eskimos, 174
Euphausiids, 19, 43
Europe, 96, 102, 167-168, 173, 174-177, 180, 181, 188-189
Everglades, 97
Ewing, Professor W. Maurice, 73, 74
_E. W. Scripps_, 40
Exploration, 14-15, 37-41, 43-44, 177, 194, 196-203
Explosives, 73
Eyring, C. F., 40

Falcon Island, 82
Fathometers, 40
Fernando de Noronha, island of, 125
Fetch, defined, 111
Fiji Islands, 156
Fish, and climate, 178
  deep sea, 46-53
  distribution of, 19, 42, 213
  evolving, 12, 13
  flying, 23, 24, 25
  food chain, 18-26
  migrating, 31, 34, 178-179
  voices, 50-51
  _see also_ Marine life
Fisheries, 56, 137, 139-140, 172, 176, 178-179
Flagellates, 34
Fleming, Richard, 43
Flint, 98
Florida, 21, 25, 26, 124
Flycatchers, 90
Fog, 134
Folger, Timothy, 130
Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique, 212
Foraminifera, 75-76, 98, 183
Forbes, Edward, 38
Fossils, 9, 52-53, 188
_Fram_, 62
Franklin, Benjamin, 130-131
Franklin, Sir John, 202-203
Franz Josef Land, 177
Frigate bird, 204
Frillshark, 53
Frobisher, Sir Martin, 202
Fulmars, 22, 23, 31

Galapagos Islands, 89, 90, 136, 137, 140
Gatty, Harold, 204
Gaul, 175
Gempylus, 18
Georges Bank, 114, 127
German South Atlantic Expedition, 185
Gibraltar, 141-142
Gilbert Islands, 65, 156
Gilpin, John, 130
Glaciers, 12, 56, 59, 77-78, 95, 98, 100-104, 119, 179-180;
  _see also_ Ice _and_ Ice Age
Glass sponge, 46
Glassworm, 30, 34, 43, 48
Globigerina, 75-76, 77-78
Goats, 92
Gold, 185-186
Gonyaulax, 33
Götterdämmerung, 175
Gough, island of, 65
Graham’s Reef, 82
Grand Banks, 22, 24, 56, 134, 163-164
Gravity meters, 193, 194
Greeks, 195-196
Greenland, 99, 100, 141, 143, 173-174, 178-179, 199-200
Green Mountain, 81
Grenville Mountains, 211
Ground swell, _see_ Swell
Grunion, 157-158
Guano, 137
Gulf of Maine, 146
Gulf of Mexico, 149, 168, 192, 193
Gulf of Penjinsk, 147
Gulf Stream, 21-26 passim, 57, 126-129 passim, 130-135, 136, 163-165, 176,
  180, 221, 222
Gypsum, 188, 189

Haber, Fritz, 185
Halley, Edmund, 92
Hawaii, 65, 91, 92, 100, 122-123, 201, 204, 219
Hawks, 90
Heezen, Bruce C., 214
_Heimskringla_, 200
_Henderson_, U.S.S., 41
Henwood, W. J., 120
_Hero_, 202
Herodotus, 196
Herring, 19, 22, 48, 126, 172
Hess, Professor H. H., 63, 67, 74
Heyerdahl, Thor, 17-18, 43
Highland Light, 119
Himalayas, 96, 97
Himlico of Carthage, 196-197
_Historia Norwegiae_, 205
Hjorleif, 205
Hjort, Johan, 42-43
Hogs, 91
Holderness Coast, 120
Holland, 172, 174, 220-221
Holothurians, 184
Homer, 196
Honouliuli Forest Reserve, 91
Horse mackerel, 179
Houot, Georges, 213
Hudson, Henry, 202, 203
Hudson, W. H., 93
Hudson Bay, 9, 95
Hudson Canyon, 58
Hudson River, 95
Humboldt Current, 22, 136-137, 140, 168-169
Hurricanes, 111, 121, 124
Hydrogen sulphide, 191
Hydrographic Office, 207
Hydrophones, 50-51

Ice, 78, 114-115, 176-178
Ice Age, 59, 95, 103, 180
Iceland, 164, 165, 173-174, 175-180 passim, 205
India, 102, 203
Indian Ocean, 60, 61, 65, 74, 89, 101, 103, 129, 143, 149, 217
Ingolf (Viking), 205
Inland seas, 95-104, 188-189, 190
Insects, 9, 12, 85-89 passim
Institute of Marine Biology, Messina, 145
Instruments, 104
  diving, 37-38
  navigation, 203-204, 205, 207, 209
  for oil, 193-194
  sounding, 39-40, 54-55, 203
  for studying sediments, 72-73
  temperature recording, 222
  tide-predicting, 147
  wave-recording, 107-109, 117, 123, 125
International Geophysical Year, 218
Iodine, 183, 186
Ireland, 109
Iselin, Columbus, 221
Islands, 61-62, 64-65, 67-70, 74, 79-93, 114, 136

Jaegers, 23
Jaggar, Thomas A., 84
Japan, 156
Japan Current, 135-136
Japanese Trench, 121
_Jasper_, U.S.S., 40
Jellyfish, 8, 16, 19, 24, 31, 34, 35, 46, 48
Johnson, Martin W., 40
Jordan Valley, 190
Jurassic period, 128, 193
Jutland, 175

Kalahari Desert, 168
Karelia Peninsula, 211
Kellogg, W. N., 215
Kelvin, Lord, 55
Kerguelen, Yves Joseph de, 202
Killarney Mountains, 211
_Kings Mirror_, 200
Kittiwakes, 31
Knight, E. F., 82
_Knipowitsch_, 177
_Kon-tiki_, 18
Krakatoa, island of, 82-83, 87, 88
Krill, 31
Kullenberg, Börje, 73
Kuroshio Current, 135

Labrador Current, 134-135, 136, 165, 166, 176, 177
Labrador Sea, 141
Lack, David, 90
Land bridges, 86, 102
_Landnamabok_, 205
Lands End, 107-108
Lantana, 91
Laptev Sea, 178
Latimeria, 53, 215
Laurentian hills, 9
Laysan, island of, 90, 92-93
Legends, 195-196, 200, 201
Lemuria, island of, 67
Life, origins of, 7-15
Light, penetration of, 48-49
Lighthouses, 118-119
Lime, 76
Lisbon earthquake, 121-122
Lithium, 190
Lofoten islands, 153-154
Long Branch, N.J., 109
Loran, 203, 207
Lord Howe Island, 90-91
_Lord Kelvin_, 77
Luminescence, _see_ Phosphorescence

Mackerel, 19, 22, 48
Maelstrom, 153-154
Magellan, Ferdinand, 54, 201
Magnesium, 187
Magnesium chlorides, 185, 189
Magnesium sulphates, 185, 188-189
Magnetic needle, 205
Magnetometer, 193, 194
Makee, Captain, 91
Malay Archipelago, 156
Mammals, 14
Mammoth Cave, 98
Man, on islands, 90
  origins of, 13-15
  primitive, 68, 102-103
Manganese nodules, 219
Manitoba, 211
Man-of-war bird, 204
Maoris, 89
Maps, _see_ Charts
Mariana Trench, 213, 217
Marine life
  Arctic, 218
  colors of, 20, 23, 30, 48-49
  and currents, 136-140, 142-143
  deep sea, 39-53, 126
  distribution of, 21, 57
  food, 8, 18-26, 30-31, 44-45, 140, 155, 158
  invertebrate, 9
  and kinds of water, 19-26
  and minerals, 183-186, 191, 192
  and sargassum weed, 25-27
  seasonal, 29-31
  sedimental, 75-77
  sessile, 155
  spawning, 30-31, 36, 156-158
  and tide, 155-159
  unicellular, 75-76
Mariner’s compass, 203
_Mariner’s Mirror_, 206
Marshall Islands, 65
Maui, island of, 91
Mauritius, island of, 89
Maury, Lt. Matthew Fontaine, 55, 207
Mayr, Ernst, 90
Mediterranean Sea, 77, 81-82, 135, 141-142, 143, 192, 195, 197, 199, 200
Medusae, 48
Meganyctiphanes, 32
Menhaden, 19
Merry Men of Mey, 113
Mesozoic period, 52
_Meteor_, 63, 185
Michigan Basin, 189
Midway Island, 93
Migrations, barbarian, 175
  birds, 85, 87-88, 204
  fish, 31, 34, 178-179
  to islands, 85-88
Millot, J., 215
Mindanao Trench, 60, 61
Minerals, 22, 29, 76, 98, 182-194
Mining, 183
Minnesota, 211
Minot’s Ledge, 118
Moas, 89
Mohave Desert, 189
Mohorovicic discontinuity, 219
Mollusks, 12, 19, 33, 155, 183, 185
Monsoons, 129
Monterey Canyon, 58-59
Moon, 4-6, 128, 145-147, 149-151, 156-157, 172
Moorlog, 69
Morocco, 125, 139
Mountains, continental, 8-9, 12-13, 65, 67, 73, 75
  undersea, 59-67, 79, 80-81, 83-84, 114, 217;
  _see also_ Islands
Muds, _see_ Sediments
Muir Glacier, 179
Murex, 187
Murphy, Robert Cushman, 90, 125, 138-139

Nansen, Fridtjof, 199-200, 218
Nantucket Island, 146, 148
Natural bridge, 121
_Nautilus_, 62, 217
Navigation, 203-209
Navy, U.S., 62, 207
Neap tides, 145
Near East, 192
_Nereus_, U.S.S., 41
New England, 114, 124
New Zealand, 89, 201, 204
Niagara Falls, 98
Nickel, 185
Nitrate of soda, 186
Noctiluca, 32
Nordenskiöld, Baron Nils, 203
Norsemen, 204-205, 208
North America, 94, 95-96, 155, 189-190
North Atlantic Current, 25
North Atlantic Drift, 23, 164
North Sea, 56, 68-70, 102, 153, 167, 172, 173, 175, 180
_North Sea Pilot_, 113
Northwest passage, 201, 202-203
Norway, 101, 153-154, 179, 180, 191
_Norway Pilot_, 208
Norwegian Sea, 135, 167
Novaya Zemlya, 203
Nummulites, 97

Ocean, _see_ Sea
Oceanographic instruments, _see_ Instruments
Oceanus, 195-196
_Odyssey_, 196
Oil, 56, 115, 190-194
Ontario, 211
_On the Ocean_, 197
Ooze, _see_ Sediments
Opdal Mountains, 179
Orcas, 24
Ordovician period, 96
Orkney Islands, 116-117, 153, 167
Ottar, 198-199
Oyashio Current, 136, 163, 166
Oysters, 155, 156, 183

Pacific Ocean, 217
  and climate, 168
  currents, 129, 135-137, 140, 143, 168-169
  expeditions across, 17-18, 201
  floor, 5
  islands, 82, 92-93, 101
  level of, 94, 101
  and sediments, 74, 76
  tides, 147, 149, 156
  topography, 60-67 passim, 74
  waves, 108-109, 116, 123, 125
  winds, 168
Paleolithic man, 102-103
Paleozoic period, 190, 191
Palmer, Captain N. B., 202
Palolo worm, 156
Pamakani, 91
Panama, isthmus of, 131
Panama Canal, 147, 163
Parr, A. E., 26, 27
Passamaquoddy Bay, 144
Paumotos Islands, 125
Peary, Robert Edwin, 62
Penguins, 19, 136
Pennsylvania, 97
Penokean Mountains, 211
Pentland Firth, 113, 119, 153
_Peripli_, 205-206, 207
_Periplus of Scylax_, 205
Permian period, 188
Persian Gulf, 21, 192
Peru Current, 136
Petitcodiac River, 155
Petrels, 23
Petroleum, 56, 190-194
Pettersson, Hans, 74, 219
Pettersson, Otto, 171-173, 175-177, 181
Phaeocystis, 31
Phalaropes, 32
Phoenicians, 196-197, 204
Phosphorescence, 16, 32, 33-34, 49
Phosphorus, 29
Photography, 43, 109
_Physical Geography of the Sea, The_, 207
Piccard, Auguste, 212
Piccard, Jacques, 213
Pico Island, 64
Piggot, Dr. C. S., 72, 77, 78
Pillars of Hercules, 201
Pilot Charts, 207
Piston core sampler, 72-73
Plankton, 18-24 passim, 30, 32, 33, 41, 43, 44, 47, 139-140, 218
Plants, first, 8, 12
  island, 87, 88, 90, 91
  land, 9, 12-13
  marine, _see_ Marine life _and_ Seaweed
  and sediments, 76
Plato, 67
Pleistocene period, 58, 68, 70, 100, 102, 104, 180
Plover, Pacific golden, 88
Poe, Edgar Allan, 153
Polar Sea, 198
Polar waters, 19-22, 128, 141, 165, 176
Polynesians, 17, 201, 204
Ponce de Leon, 129-130
Porpoise, 24, 213
_Portolano_, 205
Portuguese man-of-war, 24, 48
Posidonius, 198
Potassium, 188-189
Prawns, 18, 49
Pressure, 46-48
Protoplasm, 7, 13
Protozoa, 19, 32, 97
Pterophryne, 25-26
Pteropods, 29, 48, 77
Pytheas of Massilia, 175, 197-198

Rabbits, 93
Radar, 203
Radiation thermometer, 222
Radiolarian, 29, 76
Rail, flightless, 89
  Laysan, 93
Rains, and erosion, 71, 72, 169
  first, 182
  source of, 101, 168
  and waves, 114-115
Raitt, R. W., 40
_Ramapo_, U.S.S., 115-116
Rann of Cutch, 188
Rats, 90-91, 93
Ravens, 204-205
Red Sea, 20, 192
Reefs, 21, 114
Reptiles, 13, 14, 52, 85, 88
_Resacas_, 125
Rhine River, 102
Rivers, 102, 182-183
Rocks of St. Paul, 64, 68, 84-85, 135
Roger II, King of Sicily, 200
Rollefson, Gunnar, 43
Rollers, 124-125; _see also_ Waves
Romanche Trench, 64
Roosts of Scotland, 112-113
Ross, Sir James Clark, 54-55
Ross, Sir John, 38-39

_Sadko_, 62, 177
Sahara Desert, 77, 96
Sagas, Norse, 204-205
Sailing Directions, 113, 117, 152-153, 205-208
_Sailing Directions for the Northwest and North Coasts of Norway_, 153-154
St. Brendan’s Island, 67
St. Helena, island of, 92, 101, 125
St. Lawrence, bay of, 95
St. Paul’s Rocks, _see_ Rocks of St. Paul
Salinity, 6-7, 20-21, 166
Salmon, 31
Salt, 182
  in blood, 13
  cyclic, 184
  deposits of, 189
  evaporation of, 187-189
  specific gravity of, 193
Salt domes, 193
Salts, 183, 185, 190, 194;
  _see also_ Minerals
Sambhar Salt Lake, 184
Samoa, 101
Sardines, 139, 140
Sargasso Sea, 20, 24-27, 135
Sargassum weed, 24, 25-27
Scattering layer, 39-44, 213
Schaeffer, Bobb, 215-216
Schuchert, Charles, 99
Scorpions, sea, 52
Scotland, 112-113, 117-119
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, 40, 51, 222
Sea, age of, 4
  area of, 37
  and atmosphere, 166-168
  basins, 6, 146-148
  beginnings, 3-15, 58
  darkness, 38-39, 48-49
  by day, 16, 17, 18
  depth, 55, 56, 57, 61, 217
  floor of, _see_ Deep sea, floor
  inland, 95-104, 188-189, 190
  and land temperatures, 166-167
  life in, _see_ Marine life
  by night, 16, 17-18
  patterns, _see_ Currents
  phantom bottom, 39-44
  phosphorescence, 16, 32, 33-34, 49
  red, 16
  salinity, 6-7, 20-21, 166, 182
  sounds in, 50-52, 214
  surface, _see_ Surface waters
  topography, 55-70, 218; _see also_ Deep sea, floor
  zones, 19-20, 50, 55-67;
  _see also_ Continental shelf, Continental slope, _and_ Deep sea
Sea cucumbers, 184
Sea elephants, 14
Sea level, 59, 94-104, 131-134;
  _see also_ Tides
‘Seal fish,’ 46
Sea lions, 14
Seals, 14, 19, 22, 32-33, 42, 44, 45-46, 202
Sea mounts, 63, 67
Sea of Galilee, 187
Sea of Okhotsk, 147
Searles Lake, 189
Sea slug, Sargasso, 25
Seasons, 28-36
Sea urchin, 156
Sea water, 20-21;
  _see also_ Surface waters
Seaweed, 8, 12, 56, 186;
  _see also_ Sargassum weed
Seaworms, 18, 19;
  _see also_ Worms
Second World War, 109
Sedimentary rock, 188
Sediments, 71-78, 98, 100, 140-141, 184, 192, 218
_Sedov_, 62
Seine River, 102
Seismic refraction, 73
Seismic waves, _see_ Tsunamis
Shad, 31
Sharks, 19, 23, 24, 53, 179, 219
Shearwaters, 22, 23
Shells, 71, 72, 73, 183
Shepard, Francis, 58-59, 216
Shetland Islands, 112-113, 116-117, 118, 153, 167
Shining cuckoo, 204
Shorelines, changing, 101-102
  charts of, 205-207
  and waves, 119-221
Shrimp, 19, 30, 32, 34, 43, 44, 47, 50-52
Silica, 29, 76, 183
Silurian period, 12, 52, 96, 98, 189
Skuas, 23
Smith, J. L. B., 215
Snails, 22, 30, 48, 76-77, 187
Snake-mackerel, 18
Snow, 101, 114-115
Soil, 8, 12
Somali Coast, 139
Soundings, 39-40, 54-55, 62, 109, 203, 217
South America, 17, 21, 96
South Atlantic Current, 135
‘Southern Continent,’ 201-202
Southern Hemisphere, 108, 123, 124-135
Southern Ocean, 115
South Georgia, island of, 139-140
South Trinidad, 82, 90, 92, 125
Sphinx, 97
Spiders, 85, 87, 88
Spitsbergen, 22, 165, 203
Sponges, 8, 22, 46, 186
Spring, 28-31, 36
Spring tides, 145
Squids, 18, 19, 42-43, 45, 49
Stack, defined, 121
_Stadiasmus, or circumnavigation of the great sea_, 205-206
Starfish, 8
Stars, and tides, 145
Stassfurt, 189
Stevenson, Thomas, 113, 117
Stone Age, 103
Storms, 108-109, 112, 115-119, 121, 124-125, 167, 220-221
_Story of Maps_, 206
Strait of Messina, 144-145
Submarines, 217
Subtropical waters, 22
Sulphur, 183
Sumburgh Head, 112-113
Summer, 31-32
Sun, 128, 145-147, 149-150, 166, 172
Sunda Sea, 95
Sunda Strait, 82-83, 87
Surf, _see_ Waves
Surface waters, 16-27, 37, 38, 48, 71
  color, 20, 23, 30
  content of, _see_ Minerals
  and currents, 140-142
  and seasons, 28-36
  temperature, 19, 21-22, 165-166, 180
  and upwelling, 137-141, 168
‘Surf days,’ 125
Susquehanna River, 95
Sweden, 172
Swedish Deep-Sea Expedition, 60, 74
Swell, 108-109, 111, 124-125
Swilkie, 153

Tahiti, 91, 147, 149-150, 201, 204
Teal, Laysan, 92
Terns, 23, 90
_Terror_, 54, 203
Tertiary period, 89
Texas, 124
Thames River, 102
Thermistor chain, 222
Thule, 198
Tidal currents, 112-113, 152-155
Tidal waves, 110, 121
Tide gauges, 94, 95
Tides, 144-159
  ancient, 150-151
  and climate, 176-181
  and moon, 4
  oscillation of, 146-150
  pre-ocean, 4-5
  range, 147
  storm, 124
  strength, 172-173, 181
  and sun, 5
  and topography, 146-148
  and waves, 121
Tierra del Fuego, 116, 201
Tillamook Rock, 119
Timor, 61
Tin, 198
Tonga Deep, 62
Torghattan, island of, 101
Tortoise, Galapagos, 89
Trade routes, 129-130, 175
Trade winds, 97, 114, 128, 167
_Transactions of the American Philosophical Society_, 130
Trenches, 60, 61-62, 66, 121, 213
Triassic period, 14
_Trieste_, 212, 217
Trilobites, 52
Trinidad, 82, 92
Trinidad Head Light, 119
Tristan da Cunha, island of, 65, 85, 91
Tropical waters, 19, 21-24, 128
Tsientang River, 154-155
Tsunamis, 121-123, 219
Tuamotu Archipelago, 54, 65
Tuke, John, 120
Tuna, 19
Turbidity currents, 59, 217
Turnagain Arm, 155
Turtles, sea, 14, 19
Tuscarora Trench, 61
Typhoon, 109
Tyrian purple, 187

Unalga Pass, 152
Unimak, island of, 122
Unst, island of, 118
Upwelling, 21, 22, 136-140

Vanadium, 184
Vancouver, George, 91
_Vega_, 203
Vermilion Sea, 20
Vesconte, Petrus, 206
Vikings, 173-174, 199-200
Vilgerdarson, Floki, 204-205
Vitiaz, 217
Volcanic dust, 72
Volcanic islands, 79-84, 85, 100
Volcanoes, 59, 60, 61, 66, 79, 80, 100, 183

‘Waggoners,’ 206
Waghenaer, Lucas Janssz, 206
Wallace, Alfred, 92
Walsh, Don, 213
Wave dynamometer, 117
Wave recorders, 107-109
Waves, 107-126
  destructive, 116-119, 121-122, 124, 134
  dimensions, 110-111, 115-116, 125-126
  distances traveled, 107-112 passim
  force, 117-119
  life history, 110-112
  patterns, 110
  seismic sea, 121-123
  speed, 111, 122, 123
  storm, 115-119, 121, 124-125, 220-221
  submarine, 125-126, 171-173, 176
  and tides, 110, 112-113, 121, 171-173
  and weather, 107-109
Weather forecasting, 107-109, 121-122, 123, 125, 165-166
Weser River, 102
West Indies, 25, 26, 101
West Wind Drift, 136
Whalebirds, 22
Whales, 14, 19, 22, 24, 31, 32, 42, 44-45, 46, 130, 140, 178, 197, 208,
  214
Whirlpools, 144-145, 153-154
Whitecaps, 112
White Sea, 179, 198, 203
Wick breakwater, 117-119
Wilkins, Sir Hubert, 62
Willm, Pierre-Henry, 213
Winds, and climate, 166-168, 181
  and colonization of islands, 87
  and currents, 128, 136, 140
  direction, 87, 164
  hurricane, 111, 121
  and sediments, 75
  strong, 136
  trade, 87, 114, 128, 167
  and waves, 108, 110-121, 124-125, 144
Wineland, 200
Winter, 29, 34-36
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, 43, 60, 63, 222
Worms, 8, 18, 19, 22, 30, 34, 43, 48, 156, 158-159




                           TRANSCRIBER NOTES

Misspelled words and printer errors have been corrected. Where multiple
spellings occur, majority use has been employed.

Punctuation has been maintained except where obvious printer errors
occur.

Illustrations were moved to facilitate page layout.

A cover was created for this eBook and is placed in the public domain.
The dustcover is from the First Edition.

[The end of _The Sea Around Us_ by Rachel Carson]
