=* A Distributed Proofreaders Canada eBook *=

This eBook is made available at no cost and with very few restrictions.
These restrictions apply only if (1) you make a change in the eBook
(other than alteration for different display devices), or (2) you are
making commercial use of the eBook. If either of these conditions
applies, please contact a https://www.fadedpage.com administrator before
proceeding. Thousands more FREE eBooks are available at
https://www.fadedpage.com.

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be under copyright
in some countries. If you live outside Canada, check your country's
copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER COPYRIGHT IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT
DOWNLOAD OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE.

_Title:_ Thunderball
_Date of first publication:_ 1961
_Author:_ Ian Fleming (1908-1964)
_Date first posted:_ Dec. 14, 2019
_Date last updated:_ Sep. 6, 2021
Faded Page eBook #20191233

This eBook was produced by: Al Haines, Cindy Beyer & the online
Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at https://www.pgdpcanada.net





                          [Cover Illustration]




                              THUNDERBALL




                                  007

The licence to kill for the Secret Service, the double-O prefix, was a
great honour. It had been earned hardly. It brought James Bond the only
assignments he enjoyed—the dangerous ones

                   _The James Bond Novels Available_

                             CASINO  ROYALE

                          LIVE  AND  LET  DIE

                               MOONRAKER

                         DIAMONDS  ARE  FOREVER

                        FROM  RUSSIA  WITH  LOVE

                                 DR  NO

                               GOLDFINGER

                         FOR  YOUR  EYES  ONLY

                              THUNDERBALL




SPECTRE—the Special Executive for Counterintelligence, Terrorism,
Revenge and Extortion is an international gang of supercriminals with
its headquarters in Paris.

The letter to Britain’s Prime Minister amounts to monstrous
blackmail—two high-jacked atomic bombs will be exploded in unspecified
Western cities, failing payment of a fantastic ransom of £100 million in
gold bullion.

James Bond, Britain’s Agent Extraordinary, is the man selected to foil
this hideous threat. Bond finds just one person who can help him if she
will, the savagely beautiful blonde who is the mistress of SPECTRE’s
sinister ‘Number One’.

                             *     *     *

The story is based on a Screen Treatment by K. McClory, J. Whittingham,
and the author.




                             =THUNDERBALL=

                             =IAN  FLEMING=



                              =UNABRIDGED=

                      =PAN  BOOKS  LTD  :  LONDON=




               First published 1961 by Jonathan Cape Ltd.
             This edition published 1963 by Pan Books Ltd.




                               _=Contents=_

              1 ‘TAKE IT EASY, MR BOND’                      9
              2 SHRUBLANDS                                  16
              3 THE RACK                                    26
              4 TEA AND ANIMOSITY                           33
              5 SPECTRE                                     44
              6 VIOLET-SCENTED BREATH                       53
              7 ‘FASTEN YOUR LAP-STRAP’                     64
              8 ‘BIG FLEAS HAVE LITTLE FLEAS . . .’         73
              9 MULTIPLE REQUIEM                            83
             10 THE _DISCO VOLANTE_                         93
             11 DOMINO                                     106
             12 THE MAN FROM THE CIA                       116
             13 ‘MY NAME IS EMILIO LARGO’                  126
             14 SOUR MARTINIS                              136
             15 CARDBOARD HERO                             145
             16 SWIMMING THE GAUNTLET                      157
             17 THE RED-EYED CATACOMB                      165
             18 HOW TO EAT A GIRL                          178
             19 WHEN THE KISSING STOPPED                   186
             20 TIME FOR DECISION                          195
             21 VERY SOFTLY, VERY SLOWLY                   203
             22 THE SHADOWER                               211
             23 NAKED WARFARE                              220
             24 ‘TAKE IT EASY, MR BOND’                    231




                                  _To_
                              ERNEST CUNEO
                                 _Muse_




                                   1


                       ‘_Take it easy, Mr Bond_’

It was one of those days when it seemed to James Bond that all life, as
someone put it, was nothing but a heap of six to four against.

To begin with he was ashamed of himself—a rare state of mind. He had a
hangover, a bad one, with an aching head and stiff joints. When he
coughed—smoking too much goes with drinking too much and doubles the
hangover—a cloud of small luminous black spots swam across his vision
like amoebae in pond water. The one drink too many signals itself
unmistakably. His final whisky and soda in the luxurious flat in Park
Lane had been no different from the ten preceding ones, but it had gone
down reluctantly and had left a bitter taste and an ugly sensation of
surfeit. And, although he had taken in the message, he had agreed to
play just one more rubber. Five pounds a hundred as it’s the last one?
He had agreed. And he had played the rubber like a fool. Even now he
could see the queen of spades, with that stupid Mona Lisa smile on her
fat face, slapping triumphantly down on his knave—the queen, as his
partner had so sharply reminded him, that had been so infallibly marked
with South, and that had made the difference between a grand slam
redoubled (drunkenly) for him, and four hundred points above the line
for the opposition. In the end it had been a twenty-point rubber, £100
against him—important money.

Again Bond dabbed with the bloodstained styptic pencil at the cut on his
chin and despised the face that stared sullenly back at him from the
mirror above the washbasin. Stupid, ignorant bastard! It all came from
having nothing to do. More than a month of paper-work—ticking off his
number on stupid dockets, scribbling minutes that got spikier as the
weeks passed, and snapping back down the telephone when some harmless
section officer tried to argue with him. And then his secretary had gone
down with the flu and he had been given a silly, and, worse, ugly bitch
from the pool who called him ‘sir’ and spoke to him primly through a
mouth full of fruit stones. And now it was another Monday morning.
Another week was beginning. The May rain thrashed at the windows. Bond
swallowed down two Phensics and reached for the Enos. The telephone in
his bedroom rang. It was the loud ring of the direct line with
Headquarters.

                                   ★

James Bond, his heart thumping faster than it should have done, despite
the race across London and a fretful wait for the lift to the eighth
floor, pulled out the chair and sat down and looked across into the
calm, grey, damnably clear eyes he knew so well. What could he read in
them?

‘Good morning, James. Sorry to pull you along a bit early in the
morning. Got a very full day ahead. Wanted to fit you in before the
rush.’

Bond’s excitement waned minutely. It was never a good sign when M
addressed him by his Christian name instead of by his number. This
didn’t look like a job—more like something personal. There was none of
the tension in M’s voice that heralded big, exciting news. M’s
expression was interested, friendly, almost benign. Bond said something
noncommittal.

‘Haven’t seen much of you lately, James. How have you been? Your health,
I mean.’ M picked up a sheet of paper, a form of some kind, from his
desk, and held it as if preparing to read.

Suspiciously, trying to guess what the paper said, what all this was
about, Bond said, ‘I’m all right, sir.’

M said mildly, ‘That’s not what the MO thinks, James. Just had your last
Medical. I think you ought to hear what he has to say.’

Bond looked angrily at the back of the paper. Now what the hell! He said
with control, ‘Just as you say, sir.’

M gave Bond a careful, appraising glance. He held the paper closer to
his eyes. ‘“This officer”,’ he read, ‘“remains basically physically
sound. Unfortunately his mode of life is not such as is likely to allow
him to remain in this happy state. Despite many previous warnings, he
admits to smoking sixty cigarettes a day. These are of a Balkan mixture
with a higher nicotine content than the cheaper varieties. When not
engaged upon strenuous duty, the officer’s average daily consumption of
alcohol is in the region of half a bottle of spirits of between sixty
and seventy proof. On examination, there continues to be little definite
sign of deterioration. The tongue is furred. The blood pressure a little
raised at 160/90. The liver is not palpable. On the other hand, when
pressed, the officer admits to frequent occipital headaches and there is
spasm in the trapezius muscles and so-called ‘fibrositis’ nodules can be
felt. I believe these symptoms to be due to this officer’s mode of life.
He is not responsive to the suggestion that over-indulgence is no remedy
for the tensions inherent in his professional calling and can only
result in the creation of a toxic state which could finally have the
effect of reducing his fitness as an officer. I recommend that No 007
should take it easy for two to three weeks on a more abstemious regime,
when I believe he would make a complete return to his previous
exceptionally high state of physical fitness.”’

M reached over and slid the report into his OUT tray. He put his hands
flat down on the desk in front of him and looked sternly across at Bond.
He said, ‘Not very satisfactory is it, James?’

Bond tried to keep impatience out of his voice. He said, ‘I’m perfectly
fit, sir. Everyone has occasional headaches. Most week-end golfers have
fibrositis. You get it from sweating and then sitting in a draught.
Aspirin and embrocation get rid of them. Nothing to it really, sir.’

M said severely, ‘That’s just where you’re making a big mistake, James.
Taking medicine only suppresses these symptoms of yours. Medicine
doesn’t get to the root of the trouble. It only conceals it. The result
is a more highly poisoned condition which may become chronic disease.
All drugs are harmful to the system. They are contrary to nature. The
same applies to most of the food we eat—white bread with all the
roughage removed, refined sugar with all the goodness machined out of
it, pasteurized milk which has had most of the vitamins boiled away,
everything overcooked and denaturized. Why,’ M reached into his pocket
for his notebook and consulted it, ‘do you know what our bread contains
apart from a bit of overground flour?’ M looked accusingly at Bond, ‘It
contains large quantities of chalk, also benzol peroxide powder,
chlorine gas, sal ammoniac, and alum.’ M put the notebook back in his
pocket. ‘What do you think of that?’

Bond, mystified by all this, said defensively, ‘I don’t eat all that
much bread, sir.’

‘Maybe not,’ said M impatiently. ‘But how much stone-ground whole wheat
do you eat? How much yoghurt? Uncooked vegetables, nuts, fresh fruit?’

Bond smiled. ‘Practically none at all, sir.’

‘It’s no laughing matter.’ M tapped his forefinger on the desk for
emphasis. ‘Mark my words. There is no way to health except the natural
way. All your troubles’—Bond opened his mouth to protest, but M held up
his hand—‘the deep-seated toxaemia revealed by your Medical, are the
result of a basically unnatural way of life. Ever heard of
Bircher-Brenner, for instance? Or Kneipp, Preissnitz, Rikli, Schroth,
Gossmann, Bilz?’

‘No, sir.’

‘Just so. Well those are the men you would be wise to study. Those are
the great naturopaths—the men whose teaching we have foolishly ignored.
Fortunately,’ M’s eyes gleamed enthusiastically, ‘there are a number of
disciples of these men practising in England. Nature cure is not beyond
our reach.’

James Bond looked curiously at M. What the hell had got into the old
man? Was all this the first sign of senile decay? But M looked fitter
than Bond had ever seen him. The cold grey eyes were clear as crystal
and the skin of the hard, lined face was luminous with health. Even the
iron-grey hair seemed to have new life. Then what was all this lunacy.

M reached for his IN tray and placed it in front of him in a preliminary
gesture of dismissal. He said cheerfully, ‘Well, that’s all, James. Miss
Moneypenny has made the reservation. Two weeks will be quite enough to
put you right. You won’t know yourself when you come out. New man.’

Bond looked across at M, aghast. He said in a strangled voice, ‘Out of
where, sir?’

‘Place called “Shrublands”. Run by quite a famous man in his line—Wain,
Joshua Wain. Remarkable chap. Sixty-five. Doesn’t look a day over forty.
He’ll take good care of you. Very up-to-date equipment, and he’s even
got his own herb garden. Nice stretch of country. Near Washington in
Sussex. And don’t worry about your work here. Put it right out of your
mind for a couple of weeks. I’ll tell 009 to take care of the Section.’

Bond couldn’t believe his ears. He said, ‘But, sir. I mean, I’m
perfectly all right. Are you sure? I mean, is this really necessary?’

‘No,’ M smiled frostily. ‘Not necessary. Essential. If you want to stay
in the Double-O Section, that is. I can’t afford to have an officer in
that section who isn’t one hundred per cent fit.’ M lowered his eyes to
the basket in front of him and took out a signal file. ‘That’s all,
007.’ He didn’t look up. The tone of voice was final.

Bond got to his feet. He said nothing. He walked across the room and let
himself out, closing the door with exaggerated softness.

Outside the door, Miss Moneypenny looked sweetly up at him.

Bond walked over to her desk and banged his fist down so that the
typewriter jumped. He said furiously, ‘Now what the hell, Penny? Has the
old man gone off his rocker? What’s all this bloody nonsense? I’m damned
if I’m going. He’s absolutely nuts.’

Miss Moneypenny smiled happily. ‘The manager’s been terribly helpful and
kind. He says he can give you the Myrtle room, in the Annex. He says
it’s a lovely room. It looks right over the herb garden. They’ve got
their own herb garden, you know.’

‘I know all about their bloody herb garden. Now look here, Penny,’ Bond
pleaded with her, ‘be a good girl and tell me what it’s all about.
What’s eating him?’

Miss Moneypenny, who often dreamed hopelessly about Bond, took pity on
him. She lowered her voice conspiratorially. ‘As a matter-of-fact, I
think it’s only a passing phase. But it _is_ rather bad luck on you
getting caught up in it before it’s passed. You know he’s always apt to
get bees in his bonnet about the efficiency of the Service. There was
the time when all of us had to go through that physical exercise course.
Then he had that head-shrinker in, the psycho-analyst man—you missed
that. You were somewhere abroad. All the Heads of Section had to tell
him their dreams. He didn’t last long. Some of their dreams must have
scared him off or something. Well, last month M got lumbago and some
friend of his at Blades, one of the fat, drinking ones I suppose,’ Miss
Moneypenny turned down her desirable mouth, ‘told him about this place
in the country. This man swore by it. Told M that we were all like
motor-cars and that all we needed from time to time was to go to a
garage and get decarbonized. He said he went there every year. He said
it only cost twenty guineas a week which was less than what he spent in
Blades in one day and it made him feel wonderful. Well, you know M
always likes trying new things, and he went there for ten days and came
back absolutely sold on the place. Yesterday he gave me a great
talking-to all about it and this morning in the post I got a whole lot
of tins of treacle and wheat germ and heaven knows what all. I don’t
know what to do with the stuff. I’m afraid my poor poodle’ll have to
live on it. Anyway, that’s what happened and I must say I’ve never seen
him in such wonderful form. He’s absolutely rejuvenated.’

‘He looks like that blasted man in the old Kruschen Salts
advertisements. But why does he pick on me to go to this nuthouse?’

Miss Moneypenny gave a secret smile. ‘You know he thinks the world of
you—or perhaps you don’t. Anyway, as soon as he saw your Medical he
told me to book you in.’ Miss Moneypenny screwed up her nose. ‘But,
James, do you really drink and smoke as much as that? It can’t be good
for you, you know.’ She looked up at him with motherly eyes.

Bond controlled himself. He summoned a desperate effort at nonchalance,
at the throwaway phrase, ‘It’s just that I’d rather die of drink than of
thirst. As for the cigarettes, it’s really only that I don’t know what
to do with my hands.’ He heard the stale, hangover words fall like
clinker in a dead grate. Cut out the schmalz! What you need is a double
brandy and soda.

Miss Moneypenny’s warm lips pursed into a disapproving line. ‘About the
hands—that’s not what I’ve heard.’

‘Now don’t you start on me, Penny.’ Bond walked angrily towards the
door. He turned round. ‘Any more ticking-off from you and when I get out
of this place I’ll give you such a spanking you’ll have to do your
typing off a block of Dunlopillo.’

Miss Moneypenny smiled sweetly at him. ‘I don’t think you’ll be able to
do much spanking after living on nuts and lemon juice for two weeks,
James.’

Bond made a noise between a grunt and a snarl and stormed out of the
room.




                                   2


                              _Shrublands_

James Bond slung his suitcase into the back of the old chocolate-brown
Austin taxi and climbed into the front seat beside the foxy, pimpled
young man in the black leather windcheater. The young man took a comb
out of his breast pocket, ran it carefully through both sides of his
duck-tail haircut, put the comb back in his pocket, then leaned forward
and pressed the self-starter. The play with the comb, Bond guessed, was
to assert to Bond that the driver was really only taking him and his
money as a favour. It was typical of the cheap self-assertiveness of
young labour since the war. This youth, thought Bond, makes about twenty
pounds a week, despises his parents, and would like to be Tommy Steele.
It’s not his fault. He was born into the buyers’ market of the Welfare
State and into the age of atomic bombs and space flight. For him life is
easy and meaningless. Bond said, ‘How far is it to “Shrublands”?’

The young man did an expert but unnecessary racing change round an
island and changed up again. ‘’Bout half an hour.’ He put his foot down
on the accelerator and neatly but rather dangerously overtook a lorry at
an intersection.

‘You certainly get the most out of your Bluebird.’

The young man glanced sideways to see if he was being laughed at. He
decided that he wasn’t. He unbent fractionally. ‘My dad won’t spring me
something better. Says this old crate was okay for him for twenty years
so it’s got to be okay for me for another twenty. So I’m putting money
by on my own. Half way there already.’

Bond decided that the comb-play had made him over-censorious. He said,
‘What are you going to get?’

‘Volkswagen Minibus. Do the Brighton races.’

‘That sounds a good idea. Plenty of money in Brighton.’

‘I’ll say.’ The young man showed a trace of enthusiasm. ‘Only time I
ever got there, a couple of bookies had me take them and a couple of
tarts to London. Ten quid and a fiver tip. Piece of cake.’

‘Certainly was. But you can get both kinds at Brighton. You want to
watch out for being mugged and rolled. There are some tough gangs
operating out of Brighton. What’s happened to the Bucket of Blood these
days?’

‘Never opened up again after that case they had. The one that got in all
the papers.’ The young man realized that he was talking as if to an
equal. He glanced sideways and looked Bond up and down with a new
interest. ‘You going into the Scrubs or just visiting?’

‘Scrubs?’

‘Shrublands—Wormwood Scrubs—Scrubs,’ said the young man laconically.
‘You’re not like the usual ones I get to take there. Mostly fat women
and old geezers who tell me not to drive so fast or it’ll shake up their
sciatica or something.’

Bond laughed. ‘I’ve got fourteen days without the option. Doctor thinks
it’ll do me good. Got to take it easy. What do they think of the place
round here?’

The young man took the turning off the Brighton road and drove westwards
under the Downs through Poynings and Fulking. The Austin whined stolidly
through the inoffensive countryside. ‘People think they’re a lot of
crackpots. Don’t care for the place. All those rich folk and they don’t
spend any money in the area. Tea-rooms make a bit out of them—specially
out of the cheats.’ He looked at Bond. ‘You’d be surprised. Grown
people, some of them pretty big shots in the City and so forth, and they
motor around in their Bentleys with their bellies empty and they see a
tea-shop and go in just for their cups of tea. That’s all they’re
allowed. Next thing, they see some guy eating buttered toast and sugar
cakes at the next table and they can’t stand it. They order mounds of
the stuff and hog it down just like kids who’ve broken into the
larder—looking round all the time to see if they’ve been spotted. You’d
think people like that would be ashamed of themselves.’

‘Seems a bit silly when they’re paying plenty to take the cure or
whatever it is.’

‘And that’s another thing,’ the young man’s voice was indignant. ‘I can
understand charging twenty quid a week and giving you three square meals
a day, but how do they get away with charging twenty quid for giving you
nothing but hot water to eat? Doesn’t make sense.’

‘I suppose there are the treatments. And it must be worth it to the
people if they get well.’

‘Guess so,’ said the young man doubtfully. ‘Some of them do look a bit
different when I come to take them back to the station.’ He sniggered.
‘And some of them change into real old goats after a week of nuts and so
forth. Guess I might try it myself one day.’

‘What do you mean?’

The young man glanced at Bond. Reassured and remembering Bond’s worldly
comments on Brighton, he said, ‘Well, you see we got a girl here in
Washington. Racy bird. Sort of local tart if you see what I mean.
Waitress at a place called the Honey Bee Tea Shop—or was, rather. She
started most of us off, if you get my meaning. Quid a go and she knows a
lot of French tricks. Regular sport. Well, this year the word got round
up at the Scrubs and some of these old goats began patronizing
Polly—Polly Grace, that’s her name. Took her out in their Bentleys and
gave her a roll in a deserted quarry up on the Downs. That’s been her
pitch for years. Trouble was they paid her five, ten quid and she soon
got too good for the likes of us. Priced her out of our market, so to
speak. Inflation, sort of. And a month ago she chucked up her job at the
Honey Bee, and you know what?’ The young man’s voice was loud with
indignation. ‘She bought herself a beat-up Austin Metropolitan for a
couple of hundred quid and went mobile. Just like the London tarts in
Curzon Street they talk about in the papers. Now she’s off to Brighton,
Lewes—anywhere she can find the sports, and in between while she goes
to work in the quarry with these old goats from the Scrubs! Would you
believe it!’ The young man gave an angry blast on his klaxon at an
inoffensive couple on a tandem bicycle.

Bond said seriously, ‘That’s too bad. I wouldn’t have thought these
people would be interested in that sort of thing on nut cutlets and
dandelion wine or whatever they get to eat at this place.’

The young man snorted. ‘That’s all you know. I mean’—he felt he had
been too emphatic—‘that’s what we all thought. One of my pals, he’s the
son of the local doctor, talked the thing over with his dad—in a
roundabout way, sort of. And his dad said no. He said that this sort of
diet and no drink and plenty of rest, what with the massage and the hot
and cold sitz baths and what have you, he said that all clears the
blood-stream and tones up the system, if you get my meaning. Wakes the
old goats up—make ’em want to start cutting the mustard again, if you
know the song by that Rosemary Clooney.’

Bond laughed. He said, ‘Well, well. Perhaps there’s something to the
place after all.’

A sign on the right of the road said ‘“_Shrublands_”. _Gateway to
Health. First right. Silence please._’ The road ran through a wide belt
of firs and evergreens in a fold of the Downs. A high wall appeared and
then an imposing, mock-battlemented entrance with a Victorian lodge from
which a thin wisp of smoke rose straight up among the quiet trees. The
young man turned in and followed a gravel sweep between thick laurel
bushes. An elderly couple cringed off the drive at a blare from his
klaxon and then on the right there were broad stretches of lawn and
neatly flowered borders and a sprinkling of slowly moving figures, alone
and in pairs, and behind them a red brick Victorian monstrosity from
which a long glass sun-parlour extended to the edge of the grass.

The young man pulled up beneath a heavy portico with a crenellated roof.
Beside a varnished, iron-studded arched door stood a tall glazed urn
above which a notice said: ‘_No smoking inside. Cigarettes here
please._’ Bond got down from the taxi and pulled his suitcase out of the
back. He gave the young man a ten-shilling tip. The young man accepted
it as no less than his due. He said, ‘Thanks. You ever want to break
out, you can call me up. Polly’s not the only one. And there’s a
tea-shop on the Brighton road has buttered muffins. So long.’ He banged
the gears into bottom and ground off back the way he had come. Bond
picked up his suitcase and walked resignedly up the steps and through
the heavy door.

Inside it was very warm and quiet. At the reception desk in the big
oak-panelled hall a severely pretty girl in starched white welcomed him
briskly. When he had signed the register she led him through a series of
sombrely furnished public rooms and down a neutral-smelling white
corridor to the back of the building. Here there was a communicating
door with the annex, a long low cheaply-built structure with rooms on
both sides of a central passage. The doors bore the names of flowers and
shrubs. She showed him into Myrtle, told him that ‘The Chief’ would see
him in an hour’s time, at six o’clock, and left him.

It was a room-shaped room with furniture-shaped furniture, and dainty
curtains. The bed was provided with an electric blanket. There was a
vase containing three marigolds beside the bed and a book called _Nature
Cure Explained_ by Alan Moyle, MBNA. Bond opened it and ascertained that
the initials stood for ‘Member: British Naturopathic Association’. He
turned off the central heating and opened the windows wide. The herb
garden, row upon row of small nameless plants round a central sundial,
smiled up at him. Bond unpacked his things and sat down in the single
armchair and read about eliminating the waste products from his body. He
learned a great deal about foods he had never heard of, such as
Potassium Broth, Nut Mince, and the mysteriously named Unmalted Slippery
Elm. He had got as far as the chapter on massage and was reflecting on
the injunction that this art should be divided into Effleurage,
Stroking, Friction, Kneading, Petrissage, Tapotement, and Vibration,
when the telephone rang. A girl’s voice said that Mr Wain would be glad
to see him in Consulting Room A in five minutes.

Mr Joshua Wain had a firm, dry handshake and a resonant, encouraging
voice. He had a lot of bushy grey hair above an unlined brow, soft,
clear brown eyes, and a sincere and Christian smile. He appeared to be
genuinely pleased to see Bond and to be interested in him. He wore a
very clean smock-like coat with short sleeves from which strong hairy
arms hung relaxed. Below were rather incongruous pin-stripe trousers. He
wore sandals over socks of conservative grey and when he moved across
the consulting-room his stride was a springy lope.

Mr Wain asked Bond to remove all his clothes except his pants. When he
saw the many scars he said politely, ‘Dear me, you do seem to have been
in the wars, Mr Bond.’

Bond said indifferently, ‘Near miss. During the war.’

‘Really! War between peoples is a terrible thing. Now, just breathe in
deeply, please.’ Mr Wain listened at Bond’s back and chest, took his
blood pressure, weighed him and recorded his height, and then, after
asking him to lie face down on a surgical couch, handled his joints and
vertebrae with soft, probing fingers.

While Bond replaced his clothes, Mr Wain wrote busily at his desk. Then
he sat back. ‘Well, Mr Bond, nothing much to worry about here, I think.
Blood pressure a little high, slight osteopathic lesions in the upper
vertebrae—they’ll probably be causing your tension headaches, by the
way—and some right sacroiliac strain with the right ilium slightly
displaced backwards. Due to a bad fall some time, no doubt.’ Mr Wain
raised his eyes for confirmation.

Bond said, ‘Perhaps.’ Inwardly he reflected that the ‘bad fall’ had
probably been when he had had to jump from the Arlberg Express after
Heinkel and his friends had caught up with him around the time of the
Hungarian uprising in 1956.

‘Well now.’ Mr Wain drew a printed form towards him and thoughtfully
ticked off items on a list. ‘Strict dieting for one week to eliminate
the toxins in the blood-stream. Massage to tone you up, irrigation, hot
and cold Sitz baths, osteopathic treatment and a short course of
Traction to get rid of the lesions. That should put you right. And
complete rest, of course. Just take it easy, Mr Bond. You’re a civil
servant, I understand. Do you good to get away from all that worrying
paper-work for a while.’ Mr Wain got up and handed the printed form to
Bond. ‘Treatment rooms in half an hour, Mr Bond. No harm in starting
right away.’

‘Thank you.’ Bond took the form and glanced at it. ‘What’s Traction, by
the way?’

‘A mechanical device for stretching the spine. Very beneficial.’ Mr Wain
smiled indulgently. ‘Don’t be worried by what some of the other patients
tell you about it. They call it “The Rack”. You know what wags some
people are.’

‘Yes.’

Bond walked out and along the white painted corridor. People were
sitting about, reading or talking in soft tones in the public rooms.
They were all elderly, middle-class people, mostly women, many of whom
wore unattractive quilted dressing-gowns. The warm, close air and the
frumpish women gave Bond claustrophobia. He walked through the hall to
the main door and let himself out into the wonderful fresh air.

Bond walked thoughtfully down the trim narrow drive and smelled the
musty smell of the laurels and the laburnums. Could he stand it? Was
there any way out of this hell-hole short of resigning from the Service?
Deep in thought, he almost collided with a girl in white who came
hurrying round a sharp bend in the thickly hedged drive. At the same
instant as she swerved out of his path and flashed him an amused smile,
a mauve Bentley, taking the corner too fast, was on top of her. At one
moment she was almost under its wheels, at the next, Bond, with one
swift step, had gathered her up by the waist and, executing a passable
Veronica, with a sharp swivel of his hips had picked her body literally
off the bonnet of the car. He put the girl down as the Bentley
dry-skidded to a stop in the gravel. His right hand held the memory of
one beautiful breast. The girl said ‘Oh!’ and looked up into his eyes
with an expression of flurried astonishment. Then she took in what had
happened and said breathlessly, ‘Oh, thank you.’ She turned towards the
car. A man had climbed unhurriedly down from the driving-seat. He said
calmly, ‘I am so sorry. Are you all right?’ Recognition dawned on his
face. He said silkily, ‘Why, if it isn’t my friend Patricia? How are
you, Pat? All ready for me?’

The man was extremely handsome—a dark bronzed woman-killer with a neat
moustache above the sort of callous mouth women kiss in their dreams. He
had regular features that suggested Spanish or South American blood and
bold, hard brown eyes that turned up oddly, or, as a woman would put it,
intriguingly, at the corners. He was an athletic-looking six foot,
dressed in the sort of casually well-cut beige herring-bone tweed that
suggests Anderson and Sheppard. He wore a white silk shirt and a dark
red polka-dot tie, and the soft-dark brown V-necked sweater looked like
vicuna. Bond summed him up as a good-looking bastard who got all the
women he wanted and probably lived on them—and lived well.

The girl had recovered her poise. She said severely, ‘You really ought
to be more careful, Count Lippe. You know there are always patients and
staff walking down this drive. If it hadn’t been for this gentleman,’
she smiled at Bond, ‘you’d have run me over. After all, there _is_ a big
sign asking drivers to take care.’

‘I am so sorry, my dear. I was hurrying. I am late for my appointment
with the good Mr Wain. I am as usual in need of decarbonization—this
time after two weeks in Paris.’ He turned to Bond. He said with a hint
of condescension, ‘Thank you, my dear sir. You have quick reactions. And
now, if you will forgive me—’ He raised a hand, got back into the
Bentley, and purred off up the drive.

The girl said, ‘Now I really must hurry. I’m terribly late.’ Together
they turned and walked after the Bentley.

Bond said, examining her, ‘Do you work here?’ She said that she did. She
had been at Shrublands for three years. She liked it. And how long was
he staying? The small-talk continued.

She was an athletic-looking girl whom Bond would have casually
associated with tennis, or skating, or show-jumping. She had the sort of
firm, compact figure that always attracted him and a fresh open-air type
of prettiness that would have been common-place but for a wide, rather
passionate mouth and a hint of authority that would be a challenge to
men. She was dressed in a feminine version of the white smock worn by Mr
Wain, and it was clear from the undisguised curves of her breasts and
hips that she had little on underneath it. Bond asked her if she didn’t
get bored. What did she do with her time off?

She acknowledged the gambit with a smile and a quick glance of
appraisal. ‘I’ve got one of those bubble cars. I get about the country
quite a lot. And there are wonderful walks. And one’s always seeing new
people here. Some of them are very interesting. That man in the car,
Count Lippe. He comes here every year. He tells me fascinating things
about the Far East—China and so on. He’s got some sort of a business in
a place called Macao. It’s near Hong Kong, isn’t it?’

‘Yes, that’s right.’ So those turned-up eyes were a dash of Chinaman. It
would be interesting to know his background. Probably Portuguese blood
if he came from Macao.

They had reached the entrance. Inside the warm hall the girl said,
‘Well, I must run. Thank you again.’ She gave him a smile that, for the
benefit of the watching receptionist, was entirely neutral. ‘I hope you
enjoy your stay.’ She hurried off towards the treatment rooms. Bond
followed, his eyes on the taut swell of her hips. He glanced at his
watch and also went down the stairs and into a spotlessly white basement
that smelled faintly of olive oil and Aerosol disinfectant.

Beyond a door marked ‘Gentlemen’s Treatment’ he was taken in hand by an
indiarubbery masseur in trousers and singlet. Bond undressed and with a
towel round his waist followed the man down a long room divided into
compartments by plastic curtains. In the first compartment, side by
side, two elderly men lay, the perspiration pouring down their
strawberry faces, in electric blanket-baths. In the next were two
massage tables. On one, the pale, dimpled body of a youngish but very
fat man wobbled obscenely beneath the pummelling of his masseur. Bond,
his mind recoiling from it all, took off his towel and lay down on his
face and surrendered himself to the toughest deep massage he had ever
experienced.

Vaguely, against the jangling of his nerves and the aching of muscles
and tendons, he heard the fat man heave himself off his table and,
moments later, another patient take his place. He heard the man’s
masseur say, ‘I’m afraid we’ll have to have the wrist-watch off, sir.’

The urbane, silky voice that Bond at once recognized said with
authority, ‘Nonsense, my dear fellow. I come here every year and I’ve
always been allowed to keep it on before. I’d rather keep it on, if you
don’t mind.’

‘Sorry, sir.’ The masseur’s voice was politely firm. ‘You must have had
someone else doing the treatment. It interferes with the flow of blood
when I come to treat the arm and hand. If you don’t mind, sir.’

There was a moment’s silence. Bond could almost feel Count Lippe
controlling his temper. The words, when they came, were spat out with
what seemed to Bond ludicrous violence. ‘Take it off then.’ The ‘Damn
you’ didn’t have to be uttered. It hung in the air at the end of the
sentence.

‘Thank you, sir.’ There was a brief pause and then the massage began.

The small incident seemed odd to Bond. Obviously one had to take off
one’s wrist-watch for a massage. Why had the man wanted to keep it on?
It seemed very childish.

‘Turn over, please sir.’

Bond obeyed. Now his face was free to move. He glanced casually to his
right. Count Lippe’s face was turned away from him. His left arm hung
down towards the floor. Where the sunburn ended, there was a bracelet of
almost white flesh at the wrist. In the middle of the circle where the
watch had been there was a sign tattooed in red on the skin. It looked
like a small zigzag crossed by two vertical strokes. So Count Lippe had
not wanted this sign to be seen! It would be amusing to ring up Records
and see if they had a line on what sort of people wore this little
secret recognition sign under their wristwatches.




                                   3


                               _The Rack_

At the end of the hour’s treatment Bond felt as if his body had been
eviscerated and then run through a wringer. He put on his clothes and,
cursing M, climbed weakly back up the stairs into what, by comparison
with the world of nakedness and indignities in the basement, were
civilized surroundings. At the entrance to the main lounge were two
telephone booths. The switchboard put him through to the only
Headquarters number he was allowed to call on an outside line. He knew
that all such outside calls were monitored. As he asked for Records, he
recognized the hollowness on the line that meant the line was bugged. He
gave his number to Head of Records and put his question, adding that the
subject was an Oriental probably of Portuguese extraction. After ten
minutes Head of Records came back to him.

‘It’s a Tong sign.’ His voice sounded interested. ‘The Red Lightning
Tong. Unusual to find anyone but a full-blooded Chinaman being a member.
It’s not the usual semi-religious organization. This is entirely
criminal. Station H had dealings with it once. They’re represented in
Hong Kong, but their headquarters are across the bay in Macao. Station H
paid big money to get a courier service running into Pekin. Worked like
a dream, so they gave the line a trial with some heavy stuff. It
bounced, badly. Lost a couple of H’s top men. It was a double-cross.
Turned out that Redland had some sort of a deal with these people. Hell
of a mess. Since then they’ve cropped up from time to time in drugs,
gold smuggling to India, and top-bracket White Slavery. They’re big
people. We’d be interested if you’ve got any kind of a line.’

Bond said, ‘Thanks, Records. No, I’ve got nothing definite. First time
I’ve heard of these Red Lightning people. Let you know if anything
develops. So long.’

Bond thoughtfully put back the receiver. How interesting! Now what the
hell could this man be doing at Shrublands? Bond walked out of the
booth. A movement in the next booth caught his eye. Count Lippe, his
back to Bond, had just picked up the receiver. How long had he been in
there? Had he heard Bond’s inquiry? Or his comment? Bond had the
crawling sensation at the pit of his stomach he knew so well—the signal
that he had probably made a dangerous and silly mistake. He glanced at
his watch. It was seven thirty. He walked through the lounge to the
sun-parlour where ‘dinner’ was being served. He gave his name to the
elderly woman with a wardress face behind a long counter. She consulted
a list and ladled hot vegetable soup into a plastic mug. Bond took the
mug. He said anxiously, ‘Is that all?’

The woman didn’t smile. She said severely, ‘You’re lucky. You wouldn’t
be getting as much on Starvation. And you may have soup every day at
midday and two cups of tea at four o’clock.’

Bond gave her a bitter smile. He took the horrible mug over to one of
the little café tables near the windows overlooking the dark lawn and
sat down and sipped the thin soup while he watched some of his fellow
inmates meandering aimlessly, weakly, through the room. Now he felt a
grain of sympathy for the wretches. Now he was a member of their club.
Now he had been initiated. He drank the soup down to the last neat cube
of carrot and walked abstractedly off to his room, thinking of Count
Lippe, thinking of sleep, but above all thinking of his empty stomach.

After two days of this, Bond felt terrible. He had a permanent slight
nagging headache, the whites of his eyes had turned rather yellow, and
his tongue was deeply furred. His masseur told him not to worry. This
was as it should be. These were the poisons leaving his body. Bond, now
a permanent prey to lassitude, didn’t argue. Nothing seemed to matter
any more but the single orange and hot water for breakfast, the mugs of
hot soup, and the cups of tea which Bond filled with spoonfuls of brown
sugar, the only variety that had Mr Wain’s sanction.

On the third day, after the massage and the shock of the Sitz baths,
Bond had on his programme ‘Osteopathic Manipulation and Traction’. He
was directed to a new section of the basement, withdrawn and silent.
When he opened the designated door he expected to find some hairy H-man
waiting for him with flexed muscles. (H-man, he had discovered, stood
for Health-man. It was the smart thing to call oneself if you were a
naturopath.) He stopped in his tracks. The girl, Patricia something,
whom he had not set eyes on since his first day, stood waiting for him
beside the couch. He closed the door behind him and said, ‘Good lord. Is
this what you do?’

She was used to this reaction of the men patients and rather touchy
about it. She didn’t smile. She said in a businesslike voice, ‘Nearly
twenty per cent of osteopaths are women. Take off your clothes, please.
Everything except your pants.’ When Bond had amusedly obeyed she told
him to stand in front of her. She walked round him, examining him with
eyes in which there was nothing but professional interest. Without
commenting on his scars she told him to lie face downwards on the couch
and, with strong, precise, and thoroughly practised holds, went through
the handling and joint-cracking of her profession.

Bond soon realized that she was an extremely powerful girl. His muscled
body, admittedly unresistant, seemed to be easy going for her. Bond felt
a kind of resentment at the neutrality of this relationship between an
attractive girl and a half naked man. At the end of the treatment she
told him to stand up and clasp his hands behind her neck. Her eyes, a
few inches away from his, held nothing but professional concentration.
She hauled strongly away from him, presumably with the object of freeing
his vertebrae. This was too much for Bond. At the end of it, when she
told him to release his hands, he did nothing of the sort. He tightened
them, pulled her head sharply towards him, and kissed her full on the
lips. She ducked quickly down through his arms and straightened herself,
her cheeks red and her eyes shining with anger. Bond smiled at her,
knowing that he had never missed a slap in the face, and a hard one at
that, by so little. He said. ‘It’s all very well, but I just had to do
it. You shouldn’t have a mouth like that if you’re going to be an
osteopath.’

The anger in her eyes subsided a fraction. She said, ‘The last time that
happened, the man had to leave by the next train.’

Bond laughed. He made a threatening move towards her. ‘If I thought
there was any hope of being kicked out of this damn place I’d kiss you
again.’

She said, ‘Don’t be silly. Now pick up your things. You’ve got half an
hour’s Traction.’ She smiled grimly. ‘That ought to keep you quiet.’

Bond said morosely, ‘Oh, all right. But only on condition you let me
take you out on your next day off.’

‘We’ll see about that. It depends how you behave at the next treatment.’
She held open the door. Bond picked up his clothes and went out, almost
colliding with a man coming down the passage. It was Count Lippe, in
slacks and a gay windcheater. He ignored Bond. With a smile and a slight
bow he said to the girl, ‘Here comes the lamb to the slaughter. I hope
you’re not feeling too strong today.’ His eyes twinkled charmingly.

The girl said briskly, ‘Just get ready, please. I shan’t be a moment
putting Mr Bond on the Traction table.’ She moved off down the passage
with Bond following.

She opened the door of a small anteroom, told Bond to put his things
down on a chair, and pulled aside plastic curtains that formed a
partition. Just inside the curtains was an odd-looking kind of surgical
couch in leather and gleaming aluminium. Bond didn’t like the look of it
at all. While the girl fiddled with a series of straps attached to three
upholstered sections that appeared to be on runners, Bond examined the
contraption suspiciously. Below the couch was a stout electric motor on
which a plate announced that this was the Hercules Motorized Traction
Table. A power drive in the shape of articulated rods stretched upwards
from the motor to each of the three cushioned sections of the couch and
terminated in tension screws to which the three sets of straps were
attached. In front of the raised portion where the patient’s head would
lie, and approximately level with his face, was a large dial marked in
lb.-pressure up to 200. After 150 lb. the numerals were in red. Below
the headrest were grips for the patient’s hands. Bond noted gloomily
that the leather on the grips was stained with, presumably, sweat.

‘Lie face downwards here, please.’ The girl held the straps ready.

Bond said obstinately, ‘Not until you tell me what this thing does. I
don’t like the look of it.’

The girl said impatiently, ‘This is simply a machine for stretching your
spine. You’ve got some mild spinal lesions. It will help to free those.
And at the base of your spine you’ve got some right sacroiliac strain.
It’ll help that too. You won’t find it bad at all. Just a stretching
sensation. It’s very soothing really. Quite a lot of patients fall
asleep.’

‘This one won’t,’ said Bond firmly. ‘What strength are you going to give
me? Why are those top figures in red? Are you sure I’m not going to be
pulled apart?’

The girl said with a touch of impatience, ‘Don’t be silly. Of course if
there was too much tension it might be dangerous. But I shall be
starting you at only 90 lb. and in a quarter of an hour I shall come and
see how you’re getting on and probably put you up to 120. Now come
along. I’ve got another patient waiting.’

Reluctantly Bond climbed up on the couch and lay on his face with his
nose and mouth buried in a deep cleft in the headrest. He said, his
voice muffled by the leather, ‘If you kill me, I’ll sue.’

He felt the straps being tightened round his chest and then round his
hips. The girl’s skirt brushed the side of his face as she bent to reach
the control lever beside the big dial. The motor began to whine. The
straps tightened and then relaxed, tightened and relaxed. Bond felt as
if his body was being stretched by giant hands. It was a curious
sensation, but not unpleasant. With difficulty Bond raised his head. The
needle on the dial stood at ninety. Now the machine was making a soft
iron hee-hawing, like a mechanical donkey, as the gears alternatively
engaged and disengaged to produce the rhythmic traction.

‘Are you all right?’

‘Yes.’ He heard the girl pass through the plastic curtains and then the
click of the outer door. Bond abandoned himself to the soft feel of the
leather at his face, to the relentless intermittent haul on his spine
and to the hypnotic whine and drone of the machine. It really wasn’t too
bad. How silly to have had nerves about it!

A quarter of an hour later he heard again the click of the outside door
and the swish of the curtains.

‘All right?’

‘Fine.’

The girl’s hand came into his line of vision as she turned the lever.
Bond raised his head. The needle crept up to 120. Now the pull was
really hard and the voice of the machine was much louder.

The girl put her head down to his. She laid a reassuring hand on his
shoulder. She said, her voice loud above the noise of the gears, ‘Only
another quarter of an hour to go.’

‘All right.’ Bond’s voice was careful. He was probing the new strength
of the giant haul on his body. The curtains swished. Now the click of
the outside door was drowned by the noise of the machine. Slowly Bond
relaxed again into the arms of the rhythm.

It was perhaps five minutes later when a tiny movement of the air
against his face made Bond open his eyes. In front of his eyes was a
hand, a man’s hand, reaching softly for the lever of the accelerator.
Bond watched it, at first fascinated, and then with dawning horror as
the lever was slowly depressed and the straps began to haul madly at his
body. He shouted—something, he didn’t know what. His whole body was
racked with a great pain. Desperately he lifted his head and shouted
again. On the dial, the needle was trembling at 200! His head dropped
back, exhausted. Through a mist of sweat he watched the hand softly
release the lever. The hand paused and turned slowly so that the back of
the wrist was just below his eyes. In the centre of the wrist was the
little red sign of the zigzag and the two bisecting lines. A voice said
quietly, close up against his ear, ‘You will not meddle again, my
friend.’ Then there was nothing but the great whine and groan of the
machine and the bite of the straps that were tearing his body in half.
Bond began to scream, weakly, while the sweat poured from him and
dripped off the leather cushions on to the floor.

Then suddenly there was blackness.




                                   4


                          _Tea and Animosity_

It is just as well that the body retains no memory of pain. Yes, it
hurt, that abscess, that broken bone, but just how it hurt, and how
much, is soon forgotten by the brain and the nerves. It is not so with
pleasant sensations, a scent, a taste, the particular texture of a kiss.
These things can be almost totally recalled. Bond, gingerly exploring
his sensations as life came flooding back into his body, was astonished
that the web of agony that had held his body so utterly had now
completely dissolved. It was true that his whole spine ached as if it
had been beaten, each vertebra separately, with wooden truncheons, but
this pain was recognizable, something within his knowledge and therefore
capable of control. The searing tornado that had entered his body and
utterly dominated it, replacing his identity with its own, had gone. How
had it been? What had it been like? Bond couldn’t remember except that
it had reduced him to something lower in the scale of existence than a
handful of grass in the mouth of a tiger.

The murmur of voices grew more distinct.

‘But what told you first that something was wrong, Miss Fearing?’

‘It was the noise, the noise of the machine. I had just finished a
treatment. A few minutes later I heard it. I’d never heard it so loud. I
thought perhaps the door had been left open. I wasn’t really worried but
I came along to make sure. And there it was. The indicator up to 200! I
tore down the lever and got the straps off and ran to the surgery and
found the coramine and injected it into the vein—one c.c. The pulse was
terribly weak. Then I telephoned you.’

‘You seem to have done everything possible, Miss Fearing. And I’m sure
you bear no responsibility for this terrible thing.’ Mr Wain’s voice was
doubtful. ‘It really is most unfortunate. I suppose the patient must
have jerked the lever, somehow. Perhaps he was experimenting. He might
easily have killed himself. We must tell the company about this and have
some safety arrangement installed.’

A hand gingerly clasped Bond’s wrist, feeling for his pulse. Bond
thought it was time to re-enter the world. He must quickly get himself a
doctor, a real one, not one of these grated-carrot merchants. A sudden
wave of anger poured through him. This was all M’s fault. M was mad. He
would have it out with him when he got back to Headquarters. If
necessary he would go higher—to the Chiefs of Staff, the Cabinet, the
Prime Minister. M was a dangerous lunatic—a danger to the country. It
was up to Bond to save England. The weak, hysterical thoughts whirled
through his brain, mixed themselves up with the hairy hand of Count
Lippe, the mouth of Patricia Fearing, the taste of hot vegetable soup
and, as consciousness slipped away from him again, the diminishing voice
of Mr Wain: ‘No structural damage. Only considerable surface abrasion of
the nerve ends. And of course shock. You will take personal charge of
the case, Miss Fearing. Rest, warmth, and effleurage. Is that under. . .
?’

                                   ★

Rest, warmth, and effleurage. When Bond came round again, he was lying
face downward on his bed and his whole body was bathed in exquisite
sensation. Beneath him was the soft warmth of an electric blanket, his
back glowed with the heat from two large sun lamps, and two hands, clad
in what felt to be some particularly velvety fur, were rhythmically
passing, one after the other, up and down the whole length of his body
from his neck to the back of his knees. It was a most gentle and almost
piercingly luxurious experience, and Bond lay and bathed himself in it.

Presently he said sleepily, ‘Is that what they call effleurage?’

The girl’s voice said softly, ‘I thought you’d come round. The whole
tone of your skin suddenly changed. How are you feeling?’

‘Wonderful. I’d be still better for a double whisky on the rocks.’

The girl laughed. ‘Mr Wain did say dandelion tea would be best for you.
But I thought a little stimulant might be good, I mean just this once.
So I brought the brandy with me. And there’s plenty of ice as I’m going
to give you an ice-pack presently. Would you really like some? Wait,
I’ll put your dressing-gown over you and then you can see if you can
turn over. I’ll look the other way.’

Bond heard the lamps being pulled away. Gingerly, he turned on his side.
The dull ache returned, but it was already wearing off. He cautiously
slipped his legs over the side of the bed and sat up.

Patricia Fearing stood in front of him, clean, white, comforting,
desirable. In one hand was a pair of heavy mink gloves, but with the fur
covering the palm instead of the back. In the other was a glass. She
held out the glass. As Bond drank and heard the reassuring, real-life
tinkle of the ice, he thought: this is a most splendid girl. I will
settle down with her. She will give me effleurage all day long and from
time to time a good tough drink like this. It will be a life of great
beauty. He smiled at her and held out the empty glass and said, ‘More.’

She laughed, mostly with relief that he was completely alive again. She
took the glass and said, ‘Well, just one more then. But don’t forget
it’s on an empty stomach. It may make you dreadfully tight.’ She paused
with the brandy bottle in her hand. Suddenly her gaze was cool,
clinical. ‘And now you must try and tell me what happened. Did you
accidentally touch the lever or something? You gave us all a dreadful
fright. Nothing like that has ever happened before. The Traction table’s
really perfectly safe, you know.’

Bond looked candidly into her eyes. He said reassuringly, ‘Of course. I
was just trying to get more comfortable. I heaved about and I do
remember that my hand hit something rather hard. I suppose it must have
been the lever. Then I don’t remember any more. I must have been awfully
lucky you came along so quickly.’

She handed him the fresh drink. ‘Well, it’s all over now. And thank
heavens nothing’s badly strained. Another two days of treatment and
you’ll be right as rain.’ She paused. She looked rather embarrassed.
‘Oh, and Mr Wain asks if you could possibly keep all this, all this
trouble, to yourself. He doesn’t want the other patients to get
worried.’

I should think not, thought Bond. He could see the headlines. ‘PATIENT
TORN NEARLY LIMB FROM LIMB AT NATURE CLINIC. RACK MACHINE GOES BERSERK.
MINISTRY OF HEALTH STEPS IN.’ He said, ‘Of course I won’t say anything.
It was my fault anyway.’ He finished his drink, handed back the glass,
and cautiously lay back on the bed. He said, ‘That was marvellous. Now
how about some more of the mink treatment. And by the way. Will you
marry me? You’re the only girl I’ve ever met who knows how to treat a
man properly.’

She laughed. ‘Don’t be silly. And turn over on your face. It’s your back
that needs treatment.’

‘How do you know?’

                                   ★

Two days later, Bond was once more back in the half-world of the nature
cure. The routine of the early morning glass of hot water, the orange,
carefully sliced into symmetrical pigs by some ingenious machine
wielded, no doubt, by the wardress in charge of diets, then the
treatments, the hot soup, the siesta, and the blank, aimless walk or bus
ride to the nearest tea-shop for the priceless strength-giving cups of
tea laced with brown sugar. Bond loathed and despised tea, that flat,
soft, time-wasting opium of the masses, but on his empty stomach, and in
his febrile state, the sugary brew acted almost as an intoxicant. Three
cups he reckoned had the effect, not of hard liquor, but of just about
half a bottle of champagne in the outside world, in real life. He got to
know them all, these dainty opium dens—Rose Cottage, which he avoided
after the woman charged him extra for emptying the sugar bowl; The
Thatched Barn, which amused him because it was a real den of
iniquity—large plates of sugar cakes put on one’s table, the piercing
temptation of the smell of hot scones—the Transport Café, where the
Indian tea was black and strong and the lorry drivers brought in a smell
of sweat and petrol and the great world (Bond found that all his senses,
particularly his palate and nose, had miraculously become sharpened),
and a dozen other cottagey, raftery nooks where elderly couples with
Ford Populars and Morris Minors talked in muted tones about children
called Len and Ron and Pearl and Ethel, and ate in small mouthfuls with
the points of their teeth and made not a sound with the tea things. It
was all a world whose ghastly daintiness and propriety would normally
have sickened him. Now, empty, weak, drained of all the things that
belonged to his tough, fast, basically dirty life, through banting, he
had somehow regained some of the innocence and purity of childhood. In
this frame of mind, the naivety and total lack of savour, surprise,
excitement, of the dimity world of the Nice-Cup-of-Tea, of the Home-made
Cakes, and the One-Lump-or-Two, were perfectly acceptable.

And the extraordinary thing was that he could not remember when he had
felt so well—not strong, but without any aches and pains, clear of eye
and skin, sleeping ten hours a day and, above all, without that nagging
sense of morning guilt that one is slowly wrecking one’s body. It was
really quite disturbing. Was his personality changing? Was he losing his
edge, his point, his identity? Was he losing the vices that were so much
part of his ruthless, cruel, fundamentally tough character? Who was he
in process of becoming? A soft, dreaming, kindly idealist who would
naturally leave the Service and become instead a prison visitor,
interest himself in youth clubs, march with the H-bomb marchers, eat nut
cutlets, try and change the world for the better?

James Bond would have been more worried, as day by day the H-cure drew
his teeth, if it had not been for three obsessions which belonged to his
former life and which would not leave him—a passionate longing for a
large dish of Spaghetti Bolognese containing plenty of chopped garlic
and accompanied by a whole bottle of the cheapest, rawest Chianti (bulk
for his empty stomach and sharp tastes for his starved palate), an
overwhelming desire for the strong, smooth body of Patricia Fearing, and
a deadly concentration on ways and means to wring the guts out of Count
Lippe.

The first two would have to wait, though tantalizing schemes for
consuming both dishes on the day of his release from Shrublands occupied
much of his mind. So far as Count Lippe was concerned, work had started
on the project from the moment Bond took up again the routine of the
cure.

With the cold intensity he would have employed against an enemy agent,
say in a hotel in Stockholm or Lisbon during the war, James Bond set
about spying on the other man. He became garrulous and inquisitive,
chatting with Patricia Fearing about the various routines at Shrublands.
‘But when do the staff find time to have lunch?’ ‘That man Lippe looks
very fit. Oh, he’s worried about his waist-line! Aren’t the electric
blanket-baths good for that? No, I haven’t seen the Turkish Bath
Cabinet. Must have a look at it some time.’ And to his masseur: ‘Haven’t
seen that big chap about lately, Count something—Ripper? Hipper? Oh
yes, Lippe. Oh, noon every day? I think I must try and get that time as
well. Nice being clear for the rest of the day. And I’d like to have a
spell in the Turkish Bath thing when you’ve finished the massage. Need a
good sweat.’ Innocently, fragment by fragment, James Bond built up a
plan of operations—a plan that would leave him and Lippe alone among
the machinery of the sound-proof treatment rooms.

For there would be no other opportunity. Count Lippe kept to his room in
the main building until his treatment time at noon. In the afternoons he
swished away in the violet Bentley—to Bournemouth it seemed, where he
had ‘business’. The night porter let him in around eleven each night.
One afternoon—in the siesta hour—Bond slipped the Yale lock on Count
Lippe’s room with a straight piece of plastic cut off a child’s
aeroplane he had bought for the purpose in Washington. He went over the
room meticulously and drew a blank. All he learned—from the
clothes—was that the Count was a much travelled man—shirts from
Charvet, ties from Tripler, Dior, and Hardy Amies, shoes from Peel, and
raw silk pyjamas from Hong Kong. The dark red morocco suitcase from Mark
Cross might have contained secrets, and Bond eyed the silk linings and
toyed with the Count’s Wilkinson razor. But no! Better that revenge, if
it could be contrived, should come out of a clear sky.

That same afternoon, drinking his treacly tea, Bond scraped together the
meagre scraps of his knowledge of Count Lippe. He was about thirty,
attractive to women, and physically, to judge from the naked body Bond
had seen, very strong. His blood would be Portuguese with a dash of
Chinaman and he gave the appearance of wealth. What did he do? What was
his profession? At first glance Bond would have put him down as a tough
_maquereau_ from the Ritz bar in Paris, the Palace at St Moritz, the
Carlton at Cannes—good at backgammon, polo, water-skiing, but with the
yellow streak of the man who lives on women. But Lippe had heard Bond
making inquiries about him and that had been enough for an act of
violence—an inspired act that he had carried out swiftly and coolly
when he finished his treatment with the Fearing girl and knew, from her
remark, that Bond would be alone on the traction table. The act of
violence might only have been designed to warn, but equally, since Lippe
could only guess at the effect of a 200-lb pull on the spine, it might
have been designed to kill. Why? Who was this man who had so much to
hide? And what were his secrets? Bond poured the last of his tea on to a
mound of brown sugar. One thing was certain—the secrets were big ones.

Bond never seriously considered telling Headquarters about Lippe and
what he had done to Bond. The whole thing, against the background of
Shrublands, was so unlikely and so utterly ridiculous. And somehow Bond,
the man of action and resource, came out of it all as something of a
ninny. Weakened by a diet of hot water and vegetable soup, the ace of
the Secret Service had been tied to some kind of a rack and then a man
had come along and just pulled a lever up a few notches and reduced the
hero of a hundred combats to a quivering jelly! No! There was only one
solution—a private solution, man to man. Later perhaps, to satisfy his
curiosity, it might be amusing to put through a good Trace on Count
Lippe—with SIS Records, with the CID, with the Hong Kong Station. But
for the time being Bond would stay quiet, keep out of Count Lippe’s way,
and plan meticulously for just the right kind of pay-off.

By the time the fourteenth day, the last day, came, Bond had it all
fixed—the time, the place, and the method.

At ten o’clock, Mr Joshua Wain received Bond for his final check-up.
When Bond came into the consulting-room, Mr Wain was standing by the
open window doing deep-breathing exercises. With a final thorough
exhalation through the nostrils he turned to greet Bond with an Ah!
Bisto! expression on his healthily flushed face. His smile was elastic
with good-fellowship. ‘And how’s the world treating you, Mr Bond? No ill
effects from that unhappy little accident? No. Quite so. The body is a
most remarkable piece of mechanism. Extraordinary powers of recovery.
Now then, shirt off, please, and we’ll see what Shrublands has managed
to do for you.’

Ten minutes later, Bond, blood pressure down to 132/84, weight reduced
by ten pounds, osteopathic lesions gone, clear of eye and tongue, was on
his way down to the basement rooms for his final treatment.

As usual, it was clammily quiet and neutral-smelling in the white rooms
and corridors. From the separate cubicles there came an occasional soft
exchange between patient and staff, and, in the background, intermittent
plumbing noises. The steady whir of the ventilation system created the
impression of the deep innards of a liner in a dead calm. It was nearly
twelve thirty. Bond lay face down on the massage table and listened for
the authoritative voice and the quick slap of the naked feet of his
prey. The door at the end of the corridor sighed open and sighed shut
again. ‘Morning, Beresford. All ready for me? Make it good and hot
today. Last treatment. Three more ounces to lose. Right?’

‘Very good, sir.’ The gym shoes of the chief attendant, followed by the
slapping feet, came down the corridor outside the plastic curtain of the
massage room and on to the end room of all, the electric Turkish bath.
The door sighed shut and a few minutes later sighed again as the
attendant, having installed Count Lippe, came back down the corridor.
Twenty minutes went by. Twenty-five. Bond rolled off the table. ‘Well,
thanks, Sam. You’ve done me a power of good. I’ll be back to see you
again one of these days I expect. I’ll just go along and have a final
salt rub and a Sitz bath. You cut along to your carrot cutlets. Don’t
worry about me. I’ll let myself out when I’ve finished.’ Bond wrapped a
towel round his waist and moved off down the corridor. There was a
flurry of movement and voices as the attendants got rid of their
patients and made their way through the staff door for the luncheon
break. The last patient, a reformed drunk, called back from the
entrance, ‘See you later, Irrigator!’ Somebody laughed. Now the
petty-officer voice of Beresford sounded down the corridor, making
certain that everything was shipshape: ‘Windows, Bill? Okay. Your next
is Mr Dunbar at two sharp. Len, tell the laundry we shall need more
towels after lunch. Ted . . . Ted. You there, Ted? Well, then, Sam, look
after Count Lippe, would you, Turkish bath.’

Bond had listened to this routine for a whole week, noting the men that
cut minutes off their duty and got off early to lunch, noting the ones
that stayed to do their full share of the last chores. Now, from the
open door of the empty shower room, he called back, in Sam’s deep voice,
‘Okay, Mr Beresford,’ and waited for the crisp squeak of the gym shoes
on the linoleum. There it was! The brief pause half-way down the
corridor and then the double sigh as the staff door opened and shut. Now
there was dead silence save for the hum of the fans. The treatment rooms
were empty. Now there was only James Bond and Count Lippe.

Bond waited a moment and then came out of the shower room and softly
opened the door to the Turkish bath. He had had one session in the
place, just to get the geography clear in his mind, and the scene was
exactly as he remembered.

It was a white cubicle treatment-room like all the others, but in this
one the only object was a big cream metal and plastic box about five
feet tall by four feet square. It was closed on all sides but the top.
The front of the big cabinet was hinged to allow a patient to climb in
and sit inside and there was a hole in the top with a foam rubber
support for the nape of the neck and the chin, through which the
patient’s head emerged. The rest of his body was exposed to the heat
from many rows of naked electric bulbs inside the cabinet and the degree
of heat was thermostatically controlled by a dial at the back of the
cabinet. It was a simple sweat-box, designed, as Bond had noticed on his
previous visit to the room, by the Medikalischer Maschinenbau G.m.b.H.,
44 Franziskanerstrasse, Ulm, Bavaria.

The cabinet faced away from the door. At the hiss of the hydraulic
fastener, Count Lippe said angrily, ‘Goddammit, Beresford. Let me out of
this thing. I’m sweating like a pig.’

‘You said you wanted it hot, sir.’ Bond’s amiable voice was a good
approximation to the chief attendant’s.

‘Don’t argue, goddammit. Let me out of here.’

‘I don’t think you quite realize the value of heat in the H-Cure, sir.
Heat resolves many of the toxins in the blood-stream and for the matter
of that in the muscle tissue also. A patient suffering from your
condition of pronounced toxaemia will find much benefit from the heat
treatment.’ Bond found the H-lingo rattling quite easily off the tongue.
He was not worried about the consequences to Beresford. He would have
the solid alibi of luncheon in the staff canteen.

‘Don’t give me that crap. I tell you, let me out of here.’

Bond examined the dial on the back of the machine. The needle stood at
120. What should he give the man? The dial ran up to 200 degrees. That
much might roast him alive. This was only to be a punishment, not a
murder. Perhaps 180 would be a just retribution. Bond clicked the knob
up to 180. He said: ‘I think just half an hour of real heat will do you
the world of good, sir.’ Bond dropped the sham voice. He added sharply,
‘And if you catch fire you can sue.’

The dripping head tried to turn, failed. Bond moved towards the door.
Count Lippe now had a new voice, controlled but desperate. He said
woodenly, concealing the knowledge and the hate, ‘Give you a thousand
pounds and we’re quits.’ He heard the hiss of the opening door. ‘Ten
thousand. All right then, fifty.’

Bond closed the door firmly behind him and walked quickly down the
corridor to put on his clothes and get out. Behind him, deeply muffled,
came the first shout for help. Bond closed his ears. There was nothing
that a painful week in hospital and plenty of Gentian Violet or Tannic
Acid jelly wouldn’t cure. But it did cross his mind that a man who could
offer a bribe of fifty thousand pounds must be either very rich or have
some very urgent reason for needing freedom of movement. It was surely
too much to pay just for avoidance of pain.

                                   ★

James Bond was right. The outcome of this rather childish trial of
strength between two extremely tough and ruthless men, in the bizarre
surroundings of a nature clinic in Sussex, was to upset, if only in a
minute fashion, the exactly-timed machinery of a plot that was about to
shake the governments of the Western world.




                                   5


                               _SPECTRE_

The Boulevard Haussmann, in the VIIIth and IXth Arrondissements,
stretches from the Rue du Faubourg St Honoré to the Opera. It is very
long and very dull, but it is perhaps the solidest street in the whole
of Paris. Not the richest—the Avenue d’Iéna has that distinction—but
rich people are not necessarily solid people and too many of the
landlords and tenants in the Avenue d’Iéna have names ending in ‘escu’,
‘ovitch’, ‘ski’, and ‘stein’, and these are sometimes not the endings of
respectable names. Moreover, the Avenue d’Iéna is almost entirely
residential. The occasional discreet brass plate giving the name of a
holding company in Liechtenstein or in the Bahamas or the Canton de Vaud
in Switzerland are there for tax purposes only—the cover names for
private family fortunes seeking alleviation from the punitive burden of
the Revenue, or, more briefly, tax-dodging. The Boulevard Haussmann is
not like that. The massive, turn-of-the-century, bastard Second Empire
buildings in heavily ornamented brick and stucco are the ‘sièges’, the
seats, of important businesses. Here are the head offices of the _gros
industriels_ from Lille, Lyons, Bordeaux, Clermont Ferrand, the ‘locaux’
of the _grosses légumes_, the ‘big vegetables’ in cotton, artificial
silk, coal, wine, steel, and shipping. If, among them, there are some
fly-by-nights concealing a lack of serious capital—_des fonds
sérieux_—behind a good address, it would only be fair to admit that
such men of paper exist also behind the even solider frontages of
Lombard and Wall Streets.

It is appropriate that among this extremely respectable company of
tenants, suitably diversified by a couple of churches, a small museum
and the French Shakespeare Society, you should also find the
headquarters of charitable organizations. At No. 136 _bis_, for
instance, a discreetly glittering brass plate says ‘_FIRCO_’ and,
underneath, ‘_Fraternité Internationale de la Résistance Contre
l’Oppression_’. If you were interested in this organization, either as
an idealist or because you were a sales man of, say, office furniture,
and you pressed the very clean porcelain bell button, the door would in
due course be opened by an entirely typical French concierge. If your
business was serious or obviously well-meaning, the concierge would show
you across a rather dusty hall to tall, bogus Directoire double doors
adjoining the over-ornamented cage of a shaky-looking lift. Inside the
doors you would be greeted by exactly what you had expected to see—a
large dingy room needing a fresh coat of its café-au-lait paint, in
which half a dozen men sat at cheap desks and typed or wrote amidst the
usual accoutrements of a busy organization—In and Out baskets,
telephones, in this case the old-fashioned standard ones that are
typical of such an office in this part of Paris, and dark green metal
filing cabinets in which drawers stand open. If you were observant of
small details, you might register that all the men were of approximately
the same age-group, between thirty and forty, and that in an office
where you would have expected to find women doing the secretarial work,
there were none.

Inside the tall door you would receive the slightly defensive welcome
appropriate to a busy organization accustomed to the usual proportion of
cranks and time-wasters but, in response to your serious inquiry, the
face of the man at the desk near the door would clear and become
cautiously helpful. The aims of the Fraternity? We exist, monsieur, to
keep alive the ideals that flourished during the last war among members
of all Resistance groups. No, monsieur, we are entirely unpolitical. Our
funds? They come from modest subscriptions from our members and from
certain private persons who share our aims. You have perhaps a relative,
a member of a Resistance group, whose whereabouts you seek? Certainly,
monsieur. The name? Gregor Karlski, last heard of with Mihailovitch in
the summer of 1943. Jules! (He might turn to a particular man and call
out.) Karlski, Gregor. Mihailovitch, 1943. Jules would go to a cabinet
and there would be a brief pause. Then the reply might come back, Dead.
Killed in the bombing of the General’s headquarters, October 21 1943. I
regret, monsieur. Is there anything further we can do for you? Then
perhaps you would care to have some of our literature. Forgive me for
not having time to spare to give you more details of FIRCO myself. But
you will find everything there. This happens to be a particularly busy
day. This is the International Refugee Year and we have many inquiries
such as yours from all over the world. Good afternoon, monsieur. _Pas de
quoi._

So, or more or less so, it would be and you would go out on to the
Boulevard satisfied and even impressed with an organization that was
doing its excellent if rather vague work with so much dedication and
efficiency.

On the day after James Bond had completed his nature cure and had left
for London after, the night before, scoring a most satisfactory left and
right of Spaghetti Bolognese and Chianti at Lucien’s in Brighton and of
Miss Patricia Fearing on the squab seats from her bubble car high up on
the Downs, an emergency meeting of the Trustees of FIRCO was called for
seven o’clock in the evening. The men, for they were all men, came from
all over Europe, by train or car or aeroplane, and they entered No 136
_bis_ singly or in pairs, some by the front door and some by the back,
at intervals during the late afternoon and evening. Each man had his
allotted time for arriving at these meetings—so many minutes, up to two
hours, before zero hour—and each man alternated between the back and
the front door from meeting to meeting. Now there were two ‘concierges’
for each door and other less obvious security measures—warning systems,
closed-circuit television scanning of the two entrances, and complete
sets of dummy FIRCO minutes, backed up one hundred per cent by the
current business of the FIRCO organization on the ground floor. Thus, if
necessary, the deliberations of the ‘Trustees’ could, in a matter only
of seconds, be switched from clandestine to overt—as solidly overt as
any meeting of principals in the Boulevard Haussmann could possibly be.

At seven o’clock precisely the twenty men who made up this organization
strode, lounged or sidled, each according to his character, into the
workmanlike boardroom on the third floor. Their chairman was already in
his seat. No greetings were exchanged. They were ruled by the chairman
to be a waste of breath and, in an organization of this nature,
hypocritical. The men filed round the table and took their places at
their numbers, the numbers from one to twenty-one that were their only
names and that, as a small security precaution, advanced round the rota
by two digits at midnight on the first of every month. Nobody
smoked—drinking was taboo and smoking frowned upon—and nobody bothered
to glance down at the bogus FIRCO agenda on the table in front of him.
They sat very still and looked up the table at the chairman with
expressions of the sharpest interest and what, in lesser men, would have
been obsequious respect.

Any man seeing No 2, for that was the chairman’s number of the month,
even for the first time would have looked at him with some degree of the
same feelings, for he was one of those men—one meets perhaps only two
or three in a lifetime—who seem almost to suck the eyes out of your
head. These rare men are apt to possess three basic attributes—their
physical appearance is extraordinary, they have a quality of relaxation,
of inner certainty, and they exude a powerful animal magnetism. The herd
has always recognized the other-worldliness of these phenomena and in
primitive tribes you will find that any man singled out by nature in
this fashion will also have been chosen by the tribe to be their chief.
Certain great men of history, perhaps Genghis Khan, Alexander the Great,
Napoleon, among the politicians, have had these qualities. Perhaps they
even explain the hypnotic sway of an altogether more meagre individual,
the otherwise inexplicable Adolf Hitler, over eighty million of the most
gifted nation in Europe. Certainly No 2 had these qualities and any man
in the street would have recognized them—let alone these twenty chosen
men. For them, despite the deep cynicism ingrained in their respective
callings, despite their basic insensitivity towards the human race, he
was, however reluctantly, their Supreme Commander—almost their god.

This man’s name was Ernst Stavro Blofeld and he was born in Gdynia of a
Polish father and a Greek mother on 28 May, 1908. After matriculating in
economics and political history at the University of Warsaw he studied
engineering and radionics at the Warsaw Technical Institute and, at the
age of twenty-five, obtained a modest post in the central administration
of the Ministry of Posts and Telegraphs. This would seem a curious
choice for such a highly gifted youth, but Blofeld had come to an
interesting conclusion about the future of the world. He had decided
that fast and accurate communication lay, in a contracting world, at the
very heart of power. Knowledge of the truth before the next man, in
peace or war, lay, he thought, behind every correct decision in history
and was the source of all great reputations. He was doing very well on
this theory, watching the cables and radiograms that passed through his
hands at the Central Post Office and buying or selling on margin on the
Warsaw Bourse—only occasionally, when he was absolutely certain, but
then very big—when the basic nature of the postal traffic changed. Now
Poland was mobilizing for war and a spate of munition orders and
diplomatic cables poured through his department. Blofeld changed his
tactics. This was valuable stuff, worth nothing to him, but priceless to
the enemy. Clumsily at first, and then more expertly, he contrived to
take copies of cables, choosing, for the ciphers hid their contents from
him, only those prefixed ‘MOST IMMEDIATE’ or ‘MOST SECRET’. Then,
working carefully, he built up in his head a network of fictitious
agents. These were real but small people in the various embassies and
armament firms to whom most of the traffic was addressed—a junior
cipher clerk in the British Embassy, a translator working for the
French, private secretaries—real ones—in the big firms. These names
were easily obtained from the diplomatic lists, by ringing up a firm and
asking Enquiries for the name of the chairman’s private secretary. He
was speaking for the Red Cross. They wished to discuss the possibility
of a donation from the chairman. And so on. When Blofeld had all his
names right, he christened his network TARTAR and made a discreet
approach to the German Military Attaché with one or two specimens of its
work. He was rapidly passed on to the representative of AMT IV of the
Abwehr, and from then on things were easy. When this pot was bubbling
merrily, and the money (he refused to accept payment except in American
dollars) coming in (it came in fast; he explained that he had so many
agents to pay off), he proceeded to widen his market. He considered the
Russians but dismissed them, and the Czechs, as probable non-, or at any
rate slow, payers. Instead he chose the Americans and the Swedes, and
money positively showered in on him. He soon realized, for he was a man
of almost mimosaic sensibility in matters of security, that the pace
could not possibly last. There would be a leak: perhaps between the
Swedish and German secret services, who he knew (for through his
contacts with their spies he was picking up the gossip of his new trade)
were working closely together in some territories; or through Allied
counter-espionage or their cryptographic services; or else one of his
national agents would die or be transferred without his knowledge while
he continued to use the name as a source. Anyway, by now he had two
hundred thousand dollars and there was the added spur that the war was
getting too close for comfort. It was time for him to be off into the
wide world—into one of the safe bits of it.

Blofeld carried out his withdrawal expertly. First he slowly petered off
the service. Security, he explained, was being tightened up by the
English and the French. Perhaps there had been a leak—he looked with
mild reproof into the eyes of his contact—this secretary had had a
change of heart, that one was asking too much money. Then he went to his
friend on the Bourse and, after sealing his lips with a thousand
dollars, had all his funds invested in Shell Bearer Bonds in Amsterdam
and thence transferred to a Numbered Safe Deposit box with the Diskonto
Bank in Zurich. Before the final step of telling his contacts that he
was brulé and that the Polish Deuxième Bureau was sniffing at his heels,
he paid a visit to Gdynia, called on the Registrar and on the Church
where he had been baptized and, on the pretext of looking up details of
an invented friend, neatly cut out the page recording his own name and
birth. It remained only to locate the passport factory that operates in
every big seaport and purchase a Canadian seaman’s passport for 2,000
dollars. Then he was off to Sweden by the next boat. After a pause in
Stockholm for a careful look round the world and some cool thinking
about the probable course of the war, he flew to Turkey on his original
Polish passport, transferred his money from Switzerland to the Ottoman
Bank in Istanbul, and waited for Poland to fall. When, in due course,
this happened, he claimed refuge in Turkey and spent a little money
amongst the right officials in order to get his claim established. Then
he settled down. Ankara Radio was glad to have his expert services and
he set up RAHIR, another espionage service built on the lines of TARTAR,
but rather more solidly. Blofeld wisely waited to ascertain the victor
before selling his wares, and it was only when Rommel had been kicked
out of Africa that he plumped for the Allies. He finished the war in a
blaze of glory and prosperity and with decorations or citations from the
British, Americans, and French. Then, with half a million dollars in
Swiss banks and a Swedish passport in the name of Serge Angstrom, he
slipped off to South America for a rest, some good food, and a fresh
think.

And now Ernst Blofeld, the name to which he had decided it was perfectly
safe to return, sat in the quiet room in the Boulevard Haussmann, gazed
slowly round the faces of his twenty men, and looked for eyes that
didn’t squarely meet his. Blofeld’s own eyes were deep black pools
surrounded—totally surrounded, as Mussolini’s were—by very clear
whites. The doll-like effect of this unusual symmetry was enhanced by
long silken black eyelashes that should have belonged to a woman. The
gaze of these soft doll’s eyes was totally relaxed and rarely held any
expression stronger than a mild curiosity in the object of their focus.
They conveyed a restful certitude in their owner and in their analysis
of what they observed. To the innocent, they exuded confidence, a
wonderful cocoon of confidence in which the observed one could rest and
relax knowing that he was in comfortable, reliable hands. But they
stripped the guilty or the false and made him feel transparent—as
transparent as a fishbowl through whose sides Blofeld examined, with
only the most casual curiosity, the few solid fish, the grains of truth,
suspended in the void of deceit or attempted obscurity. Blofeld’s gaze
was a microscope, the window on the world of a superbly clear brain,
with a focus that had been sharpened by thirty years of danger and of
keeping just one step ahead of it, and of an inner self-assurance built
up on a lifetime of success in whatever he had attempted.

The skin beneath the eyes that now slowly, mildly, surveyed his
colleagues was unpouched. There was no sign of debauchery, illness, or
old age on the large, white, bland face under the square, wiry black
crew-cut. The jawline, going to the appropriate middle-aged fat of
authority, showed decision and independence. Only the mouth, under a
heavy, squat nose, marred what might have been the face of a philosopher
or a scientist. Proud and thin, like a badly healed wound, the
compressed, dark lips, capable only of false, ugly smiles, suggested
contempt, tyranny, and cruelty. But to an almost Shakespearian degree,
nothing about Blofeld was small.

Blofeld’s body weighed about twenty stone. It had once been all
muscle—he had been an amateur weightlifter in his youth—but in the
past ten years it had softened and he had a vast belly that he concealed
behind roomy trousers and well-cut double-breasted suits, tailored, that
evening, out of beige doeskin. Blofeld’s hands and feet were long and
pointed. They were quick-moving when they wanted to be, but normally, as
now, they were still and reposed. For the rest, he didn’t smoke or drink
and he had never been known to sleep with a member of either sex. He
didn’t even eat very much. So far as vices or physical weaknesses were
concerned, Blofeld had always been an enigma to everyone who had known
him.

The twenty men who looked up the long table at this man and waited
patiently for him to speak were a curious mixture of national types. But
they had certain characteristics in common. They were all in the
thirty-to-forty age-group, they all looked extremely fit, and nearly all
of them—there were two who were different—had quick, hard, predatory
eyes, the eyes of the wolves and the hawks that prey upon the herd. The
two who were different were both scientists with scientists’
other-worldly eyes—Kotze, the East German physicist who had come over
to the West five years before and had exchanged his secrets for a modest
pension and retirement in Switzerland, and Maslov, formerly Kandinsky,
the Polish electronics expert who, in 1956, had resigned as head of the
radio research department of Philips AG of Eindhoven and had then
disappeared into obscurity. The other eighteen men consisted of cells of
three (Blofeld accepted the Communist triangle system for security
reasons) from six national groups and, within these groups, from six of
the world’s great criminal and subversive organizations. There were
three Sicilians from the top echelon of the Unione Siciliano, the Mafia;
three Corsican Frenchmen from the Union Corse, the secret society,
contemporary with and similar to the Mafia, that runs nearly all
organized crime in France; three former members of SMERSH, the Soviet
organization for the execution of traitors and enemies of the State that
had been disbanded on the orders of Khruschev in 1958, and replaced by
the Special Executive Department of the MWD; three of the top surviving
members of the former Sonderdienst of the Gestapo; three tough Yugoslav
operatives who had resigned from Marshal Tito’s Secret Police; and three
highland Turks (the Turks of the plains are no good), former members of
Blofeld’s RAHIR and subsequently responsible for KRYSTAL, the important
Middle East heroin pipeline whose outlet is Beirut. These eighteen men,
all experts in conspiracy, in the highest ranges of secret communication
and action and, above all, of silence, also shared one supreme
virtue—every man had a solid cover. Every man possessed a valid
passport with up-to-date visas for the principal countries in the world,
and an entirely clean sheet with Interpol, and with their respective
national police forces. That factor alone, the factor of each man’s
cleanness after a lifetime in big crime, was his highest qualification
for membership of SPECTRE—The Special Executive for
Counterintelligence, Terrorism, Revenge, and Extortion.

The founder and chairman of this private enterprise for private profit
was Ernst Stavro Blofeld.




                                   6


                        _Violet-scented Breath_

Blofeld completed his inspection of the faces. As he had anticipated,
only one pair of eyes had slid away from his. He had known he was right.
The double-checked reports had been entirely circumstantial, but his own
eyes and his intuition had to be the seal. He slowly put both hands
under the table. One hand remained flat on his thigh. The other went to
a side-pocket and drew out a thin gold vinaigrette and placed it on the
table in front of him. He prised open the lid with his thumbnail, took
out a violet-scented cachou, and slipped it into his mouth. It was his
custom, when unpleasant things had to be said, to sweeten his breath.

Blofeld tucked the cachou under his tongue and began to talk in a soft,
resonant, and very beautifully modulated voice.

‘I have a report to make to members about the Big Affair, about Plan
Omega.’ (Blofeld never prefixed his words with ‘Gentlemen’, ‘Friends’,
‘Colleagues’, or the like. These were fripperies.) ‘But before I proceed
to that matter, for security’s sake I propose to touch upon another
topic.’ Blofeld looked mildly round the table. The same pair of eyes
evaded his. He continued in a narrative tone of voice: ‘The Executive
will agree that the first three years of our experience have been
successful. Thanks in part to our German section, the recovery of
Himmler’s jewels from the Mondsee was successfully accomplished in total
secrecy and the stones disposed of, by our Turkish section, in Beirut.
Income: £750,000. The disappearance of the safe with its contents intact
from the MWD headquarters in East Berlin has never been traced to our
Russian section, and the subsequent sale to the American Central
Intelligence Agency yielded 500,000 dollars. The interception of one
thousand ounces of heroin in Naples, the property of the Pastori
circuit, when sold to the Firpone interests in Los Angeles, brought in
800,000 dollars. The British Secret Service paid £100,000 for the Czech
germ warfare phials from the State chemical factory in Pilsen. The
successful blackmail of former SS Gruppenführer Sonntag, living under
the name of Santos in Havana, yielded a meagre 100,000
dollars—unfortunately all the man possessed—and the assassination of
Peringue, the French heavy-water specialist who went over to the
Communists through Berlin, added, thanks to the importance of his
knowledge and the fact that we got him before he had talked, one billion
francs from the Deuxième Bureau. In round sums, as the Special Executive
knows from our accounts, the total income to date, not counting our last
and undistributed dividend, has amounted to approximately one and a half
million pounds sterling in the Swiss francs and Venezuelan bolivars in
which for reasons of prudence—they continue to be the hardest
currencies in the world—we convert all our takings. This income, as the
Special Executive will be aware, has been distributed in accordance with
our charter as to ten per cent for overheads and working capital, ten
per cent to myself, and the remainder in equal shares of four per cent
to the members—a profit to each member of approximately £60,000. This
amount I regard as a barely adequate remuneration for members’
services—£20,000 a year is not in accordance with our expectations—but
you will be aware that Plan Omega will yield sufficient to provide each
of us with a considerable fortune and will allow us, if we wish to do
so, to wind up our organization and transfer our respective energies to
other pursuits.’ Blofeld looked down the table. He said amiably, ‘Any
questions?’

The twenty pairs of eyes, on this occasion all of them, gazed stolidly,
unemotionally back at their chairman. Each man had made his own
calculation, knew his own mind. There was no comment to be extracted
from these good, though narrow, minds. They were satisfied, but it was
not a part of their harsh personalities to say so. These were known
things that their chairman had spoken. It was time for the unknown.

Blofeld slipped a second cachou into his mouth, manoeuvred it under his
tongue, and continued.

‘Then so be it. And now to the last operation, completed a month ago and
yielding one million dollars.’ Blofeld’s eyes moved down the left-hand
rank of members to the end of the row. He said softly, ‘Stand up No 7.’

Marius Domingue of the Union Corse, a proud, chunky man with slow eyes,
who was wearing ready-made, rather sharp clothes that probably came from
the Galleries Barbes in Marseilles, got slowly to his feet. He looked
squarely down the table at Blofeld. His big, rough hands hung relaxed at
the seam of his trousers. Blofeld appeared to answer his gaze, but in
fact he was noting the reaction of the Corsican next to No 7, No 12,
Pierre Borraud. This man sat directly facing Blofeld at the far end of
the long table. It was his eyes that had been evasive during the
meeting. Now they were not. Now they were relaxed, assured. Whatever the
eyes had feared had passed.

Blofeld addressed the company. ‘The operation, you will recall, involved
the kidnapping of the seventeen-year-old daughter of Magnus Blomberg,
owner of the Principality Hotel in Las Vegas and participant in other
American enterprises through his membership of the Detroit Purple Gang.
The girl was abducted from her father’s suite in the Hotel de Paris in
Monte Carlo and taken by sea to Corsica. This part of the operation was
executed by the Corsican section. One million dollars ransom was
demanded. Mr Blomberg was willing and, in accordance with the
instructions of SPECTRE, the money, in an inflated life raft, was
dropped at dusk off the Italian coast near San Remo. At nightfall the
raft was recovered by the ship operated by our Sicilian section. This
section is to be commended for detecting the transistorized radio
transmitter concealed in the raft which it was intended should allow a
unit of the French Navy to direction-find our ship and hunt it down. On
receipt of the ransom money, and in accordance with our undertaking, the
girl was returned to her parents apparently suffering from no ill
effects except for the hair-dye that had been necessary to transfer her
from Corsica to a wagon-lit in the Blue Train from Marseilles. I say
“apparently”. From a source in the police commissariat at Nice, I now
learn that the girl was violated during her captivity in Corsica.’
Blofeld paused to allow this intelligence time to sink in. He continued.
‘It is the parents who maintain that she was violated. It is possible
that only carnal knowledge, with her consent, was involved. No matter.
This organization undertook that the girl would be returned undamaged.
Without splitting hairs about the effect of sexual knowledge on a girl,
I am of the opinion that, whether the act was voluntary or involuntary
on the girl’s part, she was returned to her parents in a damaged, or at
least used, condition.’ Blofeld rarely employed gestures. Now he slowly
opened the left hand that lay on the table. He said, in the same even
tone of voice, ‘We are a large and very powerful organization. I am not
concerned with morals or ethics, but members will be aware that I
desire, and most strongly recommend, that SPECTRE shall conduct itself
in a superior fashion. There is no discipline in SPECTRE except
self-discipline. We are a dedicated fraternity whose strength lies
entirely in the strength of each member. Weakness in one member is the
death-watch beetle in the total structure. You are aware of my views in
this matter, and on the occasions when cleansing has been necessary you
have approved my action. In this case, I have already done what I
considered necessary vis-à-vis this girl’s family. I have returned half
a million dollars with an appropriate note of apology. This despite the
matter of the radio transmitter which was a breach of our contract with
the family. I dare say they knew nothing of the ruse. It was typical
police behaviour—a pattern that I was expecting. The dividend for all
of us from this operation will be correspondingly reduced. Regarding the
culprit. I have satisfied myself that he is guilty. I have decided on
the appropriate action.’

Blofeld looked down the table. His eyes were fixed on the man
standing—on No 7. The Corsican, Marius Domingue, looked back at him
steadily. He knew he was innocent. He knew who was guilty. His body was
still with tension. But it was not fear. He had faith, as they all had,
in the rightness of Blofeld. He could not understand why he had been
singled out as a target for all the eyes that were now upon him, but
Blofeld had decided, and Blofeld was always right.

Blofeld noted the man’s courage and sensed the reasons for it. He also
observed the sweat shining on the face of No 12, the man alone at the
head of the table. Good! The sweat would improve the contact.

Under the table, Blofeld’s right hand came up off his thigh, found the
knob, and pulled the switch.

The body of Pierre Borraud, seized in the iron fist of 3,000 volts,
arced in the armchair as if it had been kicked in the back. The rough
mat of black hair rose sharply straight up on his head and remained
upright, a gollywog fringe for the contorted, bursting face. The eyes
glared wildly and then faded. A blackened tongue slowly protruded
between the snarling teeth and remained hideously extended. Thin wisps
of smoke rose from under the hands, from the middle of the back, and
from under the thighs where the concealed electrodes in the chair had
made contact. Blofeld pulled back the switch. The lights in the room
that had dimmed to orange, making a dull supernatural glow, brightened
to normal. The roasted meat and burned fabric smell spread slowly. The
body of No 12 crumpled horribly. There was a sharp crack as the chin hit
the edge of the table. It was all over.

Blofeld’s soft, even voice broke the silence. He looked down the table
at No 7. He noted that the staunch, impassive stance had not quavered.
This was a good man with good nerves. Blofeld said, ‘Sit down No 7. I am
satisfied with your conduct.’ (Satisfaction was Blofeld’s highest
expression of praise.) ‘It was necessary to distract the attention of No
12. He knew that he was under suspicion. There might have been an untidy
scene.’

Some of the men round the table nodded their understanding. As usual,
Blofeld’s reasoning made good sense. No one was greatly perturbed or
surprised by what they had witnessed. Blofeld always exercised his
authority, meted out justice, in full view of the members. There had
been two previous occasions of this nature, both at similar meetings and
both on security or disciplinary grounds which affected the cohesion,
the inner strength, of the whole team. In one, the offender had been
shot by Blofeld through the heart with a thick needle fired from a
compressed air pistol—no mean feat at around twelve paces. In the
other, the guilty man, who had been seated next to Blofeld on his left
hand, had been garrotted with a wire noose casually flicked over his
head and then, with two swift steps by Blofeld, pulled tight over the
back of the man’s chair. Those two deaths had been just, necessary. So
had this death, the third. Now, the members, ignoring the heap of death
at the end of the table, settled in their chairs. It was time to get
back to business.

Blofeld snapped shut the gold vinaigrette and slipped it into a
waistcoat pocket. ‘The Corsican section,’ he said softly, ‘will put
forward recommendations for a replacement for No 12. But that can wait
until after completion of Plan Omega. On this matter, there are certain
details to be discussed. Sub-operator G, recruited by the German
section, has made an error, a serious error which radically affects our
time-table. This man, whose membership of the Red Lightning Tong in
Macao should have made him expert in conspiracy, was instructed to make
his headquarters at a certain clinic in the south of England, an
admirable refuge for his purposes. His instructions were to keep
intermittent contact with the airman Petacchi at the not-far-distant
Boscombe Down airfield where the bomber squadron is under training. He
was to report at intervals on the airman’s fitness and morale. His
reports have been satisfactory, and the airman, by the way, continues to
be willing. But Sub-operator G was also required to post The Letter on D
plus One, or three days from now. Unfortunately this foolish man took it
upon himself to become embroiled in a hotheaded fashion with some fellow
patient, at the clinic, as a result of which, and I need not go into
details, he is now in Brighton Central Hospital suffering from
second-degree burns. He is thus out of action for at least a week. This
will involve an irritating but fortunately not a serious delay in Plan
Omega. Fresh instructions have been issued. The airman Petacchi has been
provided with a phial of influenza virus of sufficient strength for him
to remain on the sick list for one week during which he will be unable
to accept his test flight. He will take the first flight after his
recovery and alert us accordingly. The date of his flight will be
communicated to Sub-operator G and he will by that time be recovered and
will post The Letter according to plan. The Special Executive,’ Blofeld
glanced round the table, ‘will readjust their flight schedules to Area
Zeta in accordance with the new operational schedule. As for
Sub-operator G’—Blofeld bent his gaze, one by one, on the three
ex-Gestapo men—‘this is an unreliable agent. The German section will
make arrangements for his elimination within twenty-four hours of the
posting of The Letter. Is that understood?’

The three German faces stood unanimously to attention, ‘Yes, sir.’

‘For the rest,’ continued Blofeld, ‘all is in order. No 1 has solidly
established his cover in Area Zeta. The treasure-hunting myth continues
to be built up and has already gained full credence. The crew of the
yacht, all hand-picked sub-operators, are accepting the discipline and
the security regulations better than had been expected. A suitable land
base has been secured. It is remote and not easily accessible. It
belongs to an eccentric Englishman, the nature of whose friends and
personal habits demands seclusion. Your arrival in Area Zeta continues
to be minutely planned. Your wardrobe awaits you in Areas F and D,
according to your various flight plans. This wardrobe, down to the
smallest detail, will be in accordance with your identities as financial
backers of the treasure hunt who have demanded to visit the scene and
take part in the adventure. You are not gullible millionaires. You are
the kind of rich, middle-class rentiers and businessmen who might be
expected to be taken in by such a scheme. You are all shrewd, so you
have come to watch over your investment and ensure that not one doubloon
goes astray.’ (Nobody smiled.) ‘You are all aware of the part you have
to play and I trust that you have studied your respective roles with
close attention.’

There was a careful nodding of heads round the table. These men were all
satisfied that not too much had been asked of them in the matter of
their cover. This one was a rich café proprietor from Marseilles. (He
had been one. He could talk to anyone about the business.) That one had
vineyards in Yugoslavia. (He had been brought up in Bled. He could talk
vintages and crop-sprays with a Calvet from Bordeaux.) That one had
smuggled cigarettes from Tangier. (He had done so and would be just
sufficiently discreet about it.) All of them had been given covers that
would stand up at least to second-degree inspection.

‘In the matter of aqualung training,’ continued Blofeld, ‘I would like
reports from each section.’ Blofeld looked at the Yugoslav section of
his left.

‘Satisfactory.’ ‘Satisfactory,’ echoed the German section, and the word
was repeated round the table.

Blofeld commented, ‘The safety factor is paramount in all underwater
operations. Has this factor received sufficient attention in your
respective training schedules?’ Affirmative. ‘And exercises with the new
CO2 underwater gun?’ Again all sections reported favourably. ‘And now,’
continued Blofeld, ‘I would like a report from the Sicilian section on
the preparations for the bullion drop.’

Fidelio Sciacca was a gaunt, cadaverous Sicilian with a closed face. He
might have been, and had been, a schoolmaster with communist leanings.
He spoke for the section because his English, the compulsory language of
the Special Executive, was the best. He said, in a careful, expository
tone of voice, ‘The chosen area has been carefully reconnoitred. It is
satisfactory. I have here,’ he touched the briefcase on his lap, ‘the
plans and detailed time-table for the information of the Chairman and
members. Briefly, the designated area, Area T, is on the north-west
slopes of Mount Etna, above the tree line—that is to say between the
altitudes of 2,000 and 3,000 meters. This is an uninhabited and
uncultivated area of black lava on the upper slopes of the volcano more
or less above the small town of Bronte. For the purpose of the drop, an
area approximately two kilometres square will be marked out by the
torches of the recovery team. In the centre of this area will be
positioned a Decca Aircraft Homing Signal as an additional navigational
aid. The bullion flight, which I estimate conservatively will consist of
five Mark IV Transport Comets, should make their run in at ten thousand
feet at an air-speed of 300 mph. Having regard to the weight of each
consignment, multiple parachutes will be needed, and, owing to the harsh
nature of the terrain, very careful packing in foam rubber will be
essential. The parachutes and the packings should be coated in Dayglo or
some phosphorescent paint to assist recovery. No doubt,’ the man opened
his hands, ‘the SPECTRE memorandum of dropping instructions will include
these and other details, but very careful planning and co-ordination by
those responsible for the flight will be necessary.’

‘And the recovery team?’ Blofeld’s voice probed softly but with an
urgent edge to it.

‘The Capo Mafiosi of the district is my uncle. He has eight
grandchildren, to whom he is devoted. I have made it clear that the
whereabouts of these children is known to my associates. The man
understood. At the same time, as instructed, I made him the offer of one
million pounds for total recovery and safe delivery to the depot at
Catania. This is a most important sum for the funds of the Unione. The
Capo Mafiosi agreed to these terms. He understands that the robbery of a
bank is in question. He wishes to know no more. The delay that has been
announced will not affect the arrangements. It will still be within the
full moon period. Sub-operator 52 is a most capable man. He has been
provided with the Hallicrafters set issued to me for the purpose and he
will listen on 18 megacycles in accordance with the schedule. Meanwhile
he remains in touch with the Capo Mafiosi, to whom he is related by
marriage.’

Blofeld was silent for a long two minutes. He slowly nodded. ‘I am
satisfied. So far as the next step is concerned, the disposal of the
bullion, this will be in the hands of Sub-operator 201, of whom we have
had full experience. He is a man to be trusted. The MV _Mercurial_ will
load at Catania and proceed through the Suez Canal to Goa, in Portuguese
India. En route, at a designated cross-bearing in the Arabian Gulf, she
will rendezvous with a merchant ship owned by a consortium of the chief
Bombay bullion brokers. The bullion will be transferred to this ship in
exchange for the equivalent value, at the ruling gold bullion price, in
used Swiss francs, dollars, and bolivars. These large amounts of
currency will be broken up into the allotted percentages and will then
be transferred from Goa by chartered plane to twenty-two different Swiss
banks in Zurich, where they will be placed in deposit boxes. The keys to
these numbered boxes will be distributed to members after this meeting.
From that moment on, and subject of course to the usual security
regulations regarding injudicious spending and display, these deposits
will be entirely at the disposal of members.’ Blofeld’s slow calm eyes
surveyed the meeting. ‘Is this procedure considered satisfactory?’

There were cautious nods. No 18, Kandinsky, the Polish electronics
expert, spoke up. He spoke without diffidence. There was no diffidence
between these men. ‘This is not my province,’ he said seriously. ‘But is
there not danger that one of the navies concerned will intercept this
ship, the _Mercurial_, and remove the bullion? It will be clear to the
Western powers that the bullion will have to be removed from Sicily.
Various patrols of the air and sea would be an easy matter.’

‘You forget,’ Blofeld’s voice was patient, ‘that neither the first, nor
if need be the second, bomb will be rendered safe until the money is in
the Swiss banks. There will be no risk on that score. Nor, another
possibility that I had envisaged, is there likely to be danger of our
ship being pirated on the high seas by some independent operator. I
envisage that complete secrecy will be enforced by the Western powers.
Any leakage would result in panic. Any other questions?’

Bruno Bayer, one of the German Section, said stiffly, ‘It is fully
understood that No 1 will be in immediate control in Area Zeta. Is it
correct that he will have full powers delegated by yourself? Is it that
he will, so to speak, be Supreme Commander in the field?’

How typical, thought Blofeld. The Germans will always obey orders, but
they wish to be quite clear where final authority resides. The German
generals would only obey the Supreme Command if they knew Hitler
approved the Supreme Command. He said firmly, ‘I have made it clear to
the Special Executive, and I repeat: No 1 is already, by your unanimous
vote, my successor in case of my death or incapacity. So far as Plan
Omega is concerned, he is deputy Supreme Commander of SPECTRE, and since
I shall remain at Headquarters to keep watch over reactions to The
Letter, No 1 will be Supreme Commander in the field. His orders will be
obeyed as if they were my own. I hope we are fully agreed in this
matter.’ Blofeld’s eyes sharply, focused, swept the meeting. Everyone
signified his agreement.

‘So,’ said Blofeld. ‘Then the meeting is now closed. I will instruct the
disposal squad to take care of the remains of No 12. No 18, please
connect me with No 1 on 20 megacycles. That waveband will have been
unoccupied by the French Post Office since eight o’clock.’




                                   7


                       ‘_Fasten your lap-strap_’

James Bond scraped the last dregs of yoghurt out of the bottom of the
carton that said ‘_Goat-milk culture. From our own Goat Farm at Stanway,
Glos. The Heart of the Cotswolds. According to an authentic Bulgarian
recipe._’ He took an Energen roll, sliced it carefully—they are apt to
crumble—and reached for the black treacle. He masticated each mouthful
thoroughly. Saliva contains ptyalin. Thorough mastication creates
ptyalin which helps to convert starches into sugar to supply energy for
the body. Ptyalin is an enzyme. Other enzymes are pepsin, found in the
stomach, and trypsin and erepsin found in the intestine. These and other
enzymes are chemical substances that break up the food as it passes
through the mouth, the stomach, and the digestive tract and help absorb
it directly into the blood-stream. James Bond now had all these
important facts at his finger-tips. He couldn’t understand why no one
had told him these things before. Since leaving Shrublands ten days
before, he had never felt so well in his life. His energy had doubled.
Even the paper-work he had always found an intolerable drudgery was now
almost a pleasure. He ate it up. Sections, after a period of being only
surprised, were now becoming slightly irritated by the forceful,
clear-headed minutes that came shooting back at them from the Double-O
Section. Bond awoke so early and so full of beans that he had taken to
arriving at his office early and leaving late, much to the irritation of
his secretary, the delectable Loelia Ponsonby, who found her own private
routines being put seriously out of joint. She was also beginning to
show signs of irritation and strain. She had even taken upon herself to
have a private word with Miss Moneypenny, M’s secretary and her best
friend in the building. Miss Moneypenny, swallowing her jealousy of
Loelia Ponsonby, had been encouraging. ‘It’s all right, Lil,’ she had
said over coffee in the canteen. ‘The Old Man was like that for a couple
of weeks after he had got back from that damned nature cure place. It
was like working for Gandhi or Schweitzer or someone. Then a couple of
bad cases came up and rattled him and one evening he went to Blades—to
take his mind off things I suppose—and the next day he felt awful, and
looked it, and from then on he’s been all right again. I suppose he got
back on the champagne cure or something. It’s really the best for men.
It makes them awful, but at least they’re human like that. It’s when
they get godlike one can’t stand them.’

May, Bond’s elderly Scottish treasure, came in to clear the breakfast
things away. Bond had lit up a Duke of Durham, king-size, with filter.
The authoritative Consumers Union of America rates this cigarette the
one with the smallest tar and nicotine content. Bond had transferred to
the brand from the fragrant but powerful Morland Balkan mixture with
three gold rings round the paper he had been smoking since his teens.
The Dukes tasted of almost nothing, but they were at least better than
Vanguards, the new ‘tobaccoless’ cigarette from America, that despite
its health-protecting qualities, filled the room with a faint ‘burning
leaves’ smell that made visitors to his office inquire whether
‘something was on fire somewhere.’

May was fiddling about with the breakfast things—her signal that she
had something to say. Bond looked up from the centre news page of _The
Times_. ‘Anything on your mind, May?’

May’s elderly, severe features were flushed. She said defensively, ‘I
have that.’ She looked straight at Bond. She was holding the yoghurt
carton in her hand. She crumpled it in her strong fingers and dropped it
among the breakfast things on the tray. ‘It’s not my place to say it,
Mister James, but ye’re poisoning yersel’.’

Bond said cheerfully. ‘I know, May. You’re quite right. But at least
I’ve got them down to ten a day.’

‘I’m not talking about yer wee bitty smoke. I’m talking ’bout this,’ May
gestured at the tray, ‘this pap.’ The word was spat out with disdain.
Having got this off her chest May gathered steam. ‘It’s no recht for a
man to be eating bairns’ food and slops and suchlike. Ye needn’t worry
that I’ll talk, Mister James, but I’m knowing more about yer life than
mebbe ye were wishing I did. There’s been times when they’ve brought ye
home from hospital and there’s talk you’ve been in a motoring accident
or some such. But I’m not the old fule ye think I am, Mister James.
Motoring accidents don’t make one small hole in yer shoulder or yer leg
or somewhere. Why, ye’ve got scars on ye the noo—ach, ye needn’t grin
like that, I’ve seen them—that could only be made by bullets. And these
guns and knives and things ye carry around when ye’re off abroad. Ach!’
May put her hands on her hips. Her eyes were bright and defiant. ‘Ye can
tell me to mind my ain business and pack me off back to Glen Orchy, but
before I go I’m telling ye, Mister James, that if ye get yerself into
anuither fight and ye’ve got nothing but yon muck in yer stomach,
they’ll be bringing ye home in a hearse. That’s what they’ll be doing.’

In the old days, James Bond would have told May to go to hell and leave
him in peace. Now, with infinite patience and good humour, he gave May a
quick run through the basic tenets of ‘live’ as against ‘dead’ foods.
‘You see, May,’ he said reasonably, ‘all these denaturized foods—white
flour, white sugar, white rice, white salts, whites of egg—these are
dead foods. Either they’re dead anyway like whites of egg or they’ve had
all the nourishment refined out of them. They’re slow poisons, like
fried foods and cakes and coffee and heaven knows how many of the things
I used to eat. And anyway, look how wonderfully well I am. I feel
absolutely a new man since I took to eating the right things and gave up
drink and so on. I sleep twice as well. I’ve got twice as much energy.
No headaches. No muscle pains. No hangovers. Why, a month ago there
wasn’t a week went by but that on at least one day I couldn’t eat
anything for breakfast but a couple of aspirins and a prairie oyster.
And you know quite well that that used to make you cluck and tut-tut all
over the place like an old hen. Well,’ Bond raised his eyebrows amiably,
‘what about that?’

May was defeated. She picked up the tray and, with a stiff back, made
for the door. She paused on the threshold and turned round. Her eyes
were bright with angry tears. ‘Well, all I can say is, Mister James,
that mebbe ye’re right and mebbe ye’re wrong. What worries the life out
of me is that ye’re not yersel’ any more.’ She went out and banged the
door.

Bond sighed and picked up the paper. He said the magical words that all
men say when a middle-aged woman makes a temperamental scene, ‘change of
life’, and went back to reading about the latest reasons for not having
a Summit meeting.

The telephone, the red one that was the direct line with Headquarters,
gave its loud, distinctive jangle. Bond kept his eyes on the page and
reached out a hand. With the Cold War easing off, it was not like the
old days. This would be nothing exciting. Probably cancelling his shoot
at Bisley that afternoon with the new FN rifle. ‘Bond speaking.’

It was the Chief of Staff. Bond dropped his paper on the floor. He
pressed the receiver to his ear, trying, as in the old days, to read
behind the words.

‘At once please, James. M.’

‘Something for me?’

‘Something for everyone. Crash-dive, and Ultra Hush. If you’ve got any
dates for the next few weeks, better cancel them. You’ll be off tonight.
See you.’ The line went dead.

Bond had the most selfish car in England. It was a Mark II Continental
Bentley that some rich idiot had married to a telegraph pole on the
Great West Road. Bond had bought the bits for £1,500 and Rolls had
straightened the bend in the chassis and fitted new clockwork—the Mark
IV engine with 9·5 compression. Then Bond had gone to Mulliners with
£3,000, which was half his total capital, and they had sawn off the old
cramped sports saloon body and had fitted a trim, rather square
convertible two-seater affair, power-operated, with only two large armed
bucket seats in black leather. The rest of the blunt end was all
knife-edged, rather ugly, boot. The car was painted in rough, not gloss,
battleship grey and the upholstery was black morocco. She went like a
bird and a bomb and Bond loved her more than all the women at present in
his life rolled, if that were feasible, together.

But Bond refused to be owned by any car. A car, however splendid, was a
means of locomotion (he called the Continental ‘The Locomotive’ . . .
‘I’ll pick you up in my locomotive’) and it must at all times be ready
to locomote—no garage doors to break one’s nails on, no pampering with
mechanics except for the quick monthly service. The locomotive slept out
of doors in front of his flat and was required to start immediately, in
all weathers, and, after that, stay on the road.

The twin exhausts—Bond had demanded two-inch pipes; he hadn’t liked the
old soft flutter of the marque—growled solidly as the long grey nose
topped by a big octagonal silver bolt instead of the winged B, swerved
out of the little Chelsea square and into King’s Road. It was nine
o’clock, too early for the bad traffic, and Bond pushed the car fast up
Sloane Street and into the park. It would also be too early for the
traffic police, so he did some fancy driving that brought him to the
Marble Arch exit in three minutes flat. Then there came the slow
round-the-houses into Baker Street and so into Regent’s Park. Within ten
minutes of getting the Hurry call he was going up in the lift of the big
square building to the eighth and top floor.

Already, as he strode down the carpeted corridor, he smelled emergency.
On this floor, besides M’s offices, was housed Communications, and from
behind the grey closed doors there came a steady zing and crackle from
the banks of transmitters and a continuous machine-gun rattle and clack
from the cipher machines. It crossed Bond’s mind that a General Call was
going out. What the hell had happened?

The Chief of Staff was standing over Miss Moneypenny. He was handing her
signals from a large sheaf and giving her routing instructions. ‘CIA
Washington, Personal for Dulles. Cipher Triple X by Teleprinter. Mathis.
Deuxième Bureau. Same prefix and route. Station F for Head of NATO
Intelligence. Personal. Standard route through Head of Section. This one
by Safe Hand to Head of MI5, Personal, copy to Commissioner of Police,
Personal, and these,’ he handed over a thick batch, ‘Personal to Heads
of Stations from M. Cipher Double X by Whitehall Radio and Portishead.
All right? Clear them as quick as you can, there’s a good girl. There’ll
be more coming. We’re in for a bad day.’

Miss Moneypenny smiled cheerfully. She liked what she called the
shot-and-shell days. It reminded her of when she had started in the
Service as a junior in the Cipher Department. She leant over and pressed
the switch on the intercom, ‘007’s here, sir.’ She looked up at Bond.
‘You’re off.’ The Chief of Staff grinned and said, ‘Fasten your
lap-strap.’ The red light went on above M’s door. Bond walked through.

Here it was entirely peaceful. M sat relaxed, sideways to his desk,
looking out of the broad window at the distant glittering fretwork of
London’s skyline. He glanced up. ‘Sit down, 007. Have a look at these.’
He reached out and slid some foolscap-sized photostats across the desk.
‘Take your time.’ He picked up his pipe and began to fill it,
absentminded fingers dipping into the shell-base tobacco jar at his
elbow.

Bond picked up the top photostat. It showed the front and back of an
addressed envelope, dusted for finger-prints, which were all over its
surface.

M glanced sideways. ‘Smoke if you like.’

Bond said, ‘Thanks, sir. I’m trying to give it up.’

M said, ‘Humpf,’ put his pipe in his mouth, struck a match, and inhaled
a deep lungful of smoke. He settled himself deeper in his chair. The
grey sailor’s eyes gazed through the window introspectively, seeing
nothing.

The envelope, prefixed ‘PERSONAL AND MOST IMMEDIATE’, was addressed to
the Prime Minister, by name, at No 10, Downing Street, Whitehall,
London, SW1. Every detail of the address was correct down to the final
‘PC’ to denote that the Prime Minister was a Privy Councillor. The
punctuation was meticulous. The stamp was postmarked Brighton, 8.30 am
on 3 June. It crossed Bond’s mind that the letter might therefore have
been posted under cover of night and that it would probably have been
delivered some time in the early afternoon of the same day, yesterday. A
typewriter with a bold, rather elegant type had been used. This fact
together with the generous 5-by-7½-in. envelope and the spacing and
style of the address gave a solid, businesslike impression. The back of
the envelope showed nothing but finger-prints. There was no sealing wax.

The letter, equally correct and well laid-out, ran as follows:

    Mr Prime Minister,

    You should be aware, or you will be if you communicate with the
    Chief of the Air Staff, that, since approximately 10 pm
    yesterday, 2 June, a British aircraft carrying two atomic
    weapons is overdue on a training flight. The aircraft is
    Villiers Vindicator O/NBR from No 5 RAF Experimental Squadron
    based at Boscombe Down. The Ministry of Supply Identification
    Numbers on the atomic weapons are MOS/bd/654/Mk V. and
    MOS/bd/655/Mk V. There are also USAF Identification Numbers in
    such profusion and of such prolixity that I will not weary you
    with them.

    This aircraft was on a NATO training flight with a crew of five
    and one observer. It carried sufficient fuel for ten hours’
    flying at 600 mph at a mean altitude of 40,000 feet.

    This aircraft, together with the two atomic weapons, is now in
    the possession of this organization. The crew and the observer
    are deceased and you have our authority to inform the
    next-of-kin accordingly, thus assisting you in preserving, on
    the grounds that the aircraft has crashed, the degree of secrecy
    you will no doubt wish to maintain and which will be equally
    agreeable to ourselves.

    The whereabouts of this aircraft and of the two atomic weapons,
    rendering them possible of recovery, will be communicated to you
    in exchange for the equivalent of £100,000,000 in gold bullion,
    one thousand, or not less than nine hundred and ninety-nine,
    fine. Instructions for the delivery of the gold are contained in
    the attached memorandum. A further condition is that the
    recovery and disposal of the gold will not be hampered and that
    a free pardon, under your personal signature and that of the
    President of the United States, will be issued in the name of
    this organization and all its members.

    Failure to accept these conditions within seven days from 5 pm
    GMT on 3 June 1959—i.e. not later than 5 pm GMT on 10 June,
    1959—will have the following consequences. Immediately after
    that date a piece of property belonging to the Western Powers,
    valued at not less than the aforesaid £100,000,000, will be
    destroyed. There will be loss of life. If, within 48 hours after
    this warning, willingness to accept our terms is still not
    communicated, there will ensue, without further warning, the
    destruction of a major city situated in an undesignated country
    of the world. There will be very great loss of life. Moreover,
    between the two occurrences, this organization will reserve to
    itself the right to communicate to the world the 48-hour time
    limit. This measure, which will cause widespread panic in every
    major city, will be designed to hasten your hand.

    This, Mr Prime Minister, is a single and final communication. We
    shall await your reply, every hour on the hour GMT, on the
    16-megacycle waveband.

                              Signed
                                    SPECTRE
                        _The Special Executive for Counterintelligence,_
                            _Terrorism, Revenge, and Extortion_

James Bond read through the letter again and put it carefully down on
the desk in front of him. He then turned to the second page, a detailed
memorandum for the delivery of the gold. ‘North-western slopes of Mount
Etna in Sicily . . . Decca Navigational Aid transmitting on . . . Full
moon period . . . between midnight and 0100 GMT . . . individual
quarter-ton consignments packed in one-foot-thick foam rubber . . .
minimum of three parachutes per consignment . . . nature of planes and
flight schedule to be communicated on the 16-megacycle waveband not
later than 24 hours before the operation . . . Any counter measures
initiated will be considered a breach of contract and will result in the
detonation of Atomic Weapon No 1 or No 2 as the case may be.’ The typed
signature was the same. Both pages had one last line: ‘Copy to the
President of the United States of America, by Registered Airmail, posted
simultaneously.’

Bond laid the photostat quietly down on top of the others. He reached
into his hip-pocket for the gunmetal cigarette case that now contained
only nine cigarettes, took one and lit it, drawing the smoke deep down
into his lungs and letting it out with a long, reflective hiss.

M swivelled his chair round so they were facing each other. ‘Well?’

Bond noticed that M’s eyes, three weeks before so clear and vital, were
now bloodshot and strained. No wonder! He said: ‘If this plane, and the
weapons, really are missing, I think it stands up, sir. I think they
mean it. I think it’s a true bill.’

M said, ‘So does the War Cabinet. So do I.’ He paused. ‘Yes, the plane
with the bombs is missing. And the stock numbers on the bombs are
correct.’




                                   8


                 ‘_Big Fleas have Little Fleas . . ._’

Bond said, ‘What is there to go on, sir?’

‘Damned little, practically speaking nothing. Nobody’s ever heard of
these SPECTRE people. We know there’s some kind of independent unit
working in Europe—we’ve bought some stuff from them, so have the
Americans, and Mathis admits now that Goltz, that French heavy-water
scientist who went over last year, was assassinated by them, for big
money, as a result of an offer he got out of the blue. No names were
mentioned. It was all done on the radio, the same 16 megacycles that’s
mentioned in the letter. To the Deuxième Communications section. Mathis
accepted on the off-chance. They did a neat job. Mathis paid up—a
suitcase full of money left at a Michelin road sign on N1. But no one
can tie them in with these SPECTRE people. When we and the Americans
dealt, there were endless cutouts, really professional ones, and anyway
we were more interested in the end product than the people involved. We
both paid a lot of money, but it was worth it. If it’s the same group
working this, they’re a serious outfit and I’ve told the PM so. But
that’s not the point. The plane is missing and the two bombs, just as
the letter says. All details exactly correct. The Vindicator was on a
NATO training flight south of Ireland and out into the Atlantic.’ M
reached for a bulky folder and turned over some pages. He found what he
wanted. ‘Yes, it was to be a six-hour flight leaving Boscombe Down at
eight pm and due back at two am. There was an RAF crew of five and a
NATO observer, an Italian man called Petacchi, Giuseppe Petacchi,
squadron leader in the Italian Air Force, seconded to NATO. Fine flyer,
apparently, but they’re checking on his background now. He was sent over
here on a normal tour of duty. The top pilots from NATO have been coming
over for months to get used to the Vindicator and the bomb-release
routines. This plane’s apparently going to be used for the NATO long
range striking force. Anyway,’ M turned over a page, ‘the plane was
watched on the screen as usual and all went well until it was west of
Ireland at about 40,000 feet. Then, contrary to the drill, it came down
to around 30,000 and got lost in the transatlantic air traffic. Bomber
Command tried to get in touch, but the radio couldn’t or wouldn’t
answer. The immediate reaction was that the Vindicator had hit one of
the transatlantic planes and there was something of a panic. But none of
the companies reported any trouble or even a sighting.’ M looked across
at Bond. ‘And that was the end of it. The plane just vanished.’

Bond said, ‘Did the American DEW line pick it up—their Distant Early
Warning system?’

‘There’s a query on that. The only grain of evidence we’ve got.
Apparently about five hundred miles east of Boston there was some
evidence that a plane had peeled off the inward route to Idlewild and
turned south. But that’s another big traffic lane—for the northern
traffic from Montreal and Gander down to Bermuda and the Bahamas and
South America. So these DEW operators just put it down as a BOAC or
Trans-Canada plane.’

‘It certainly sounds as if they’ve got the whole thing worked out pretty
well, hiding in these traffic lanes. Could the plane have turned
northwards in the middle of the Atlantic and made for Russia?’

‘Yes, or southwards. There’s a big block of space about 500 miles out
from both shores that’s out of radar range. Better still, it could have
turned on its tracks and come back into Europe on any of two or three
air-lanes. In fact it could be almost anywhere in the world by now.
That’s the point.’

‘But it’s a huge plane. It must need special runways and so on. It must
have come down somewhere. You can’t hide a plane of that size.’

‘Just so. All these things are obvious. By midnight last night the RAF
had checked with every single airport, every one in the world, that
could have taken it. Negative. But the CAS says of course it could be
crash-landed in the Sahara for instance, or on some other desert, or in
the sea, in shallow water.’

‘Wouldn’t that explode the bombs?’

‘No. They’re absolutely safe until they’re armed. Apparently even a
direct drop, like that one from the B-47 over North Carolina in 1958,
would only explode the TNT trigger to the thing. Not the plutonium.’

‘How are these SPECTRE people going to explode them then?’

M spread his hands. ‘They explained all this at the War Cabinet meeting.
I don’t understand it all, but apparently an atomic bomb looks just like
any other bomb. The way it works is that the nose is full of ordinary
TNT with the plutonium in the tail. Between the two there’s a hole into
which you screw some sort of a detonator, a kind of plug. When the bomb
hits, the TNT ignites the detonator and the detonator sets off the
plutonium.’

‘So these people would have to drop the bomb to set it off?’

‘Apparently not. They would need a man with good physics knowledge who
understood the thing, but then all he’d have to do would be to unscrew
the nose cone on the bomb—the ordinary detonator that sets off the
TNT—and fix on some kind of time fuse that would ignite the TNT without
it being dropped. That would set the thing off. And it’s not a very
bulky affair. You could get the whole thing into something only about
twice the size of a big golf-bag. Very heavy, of course. But you could
put it into the back of a big car, for instance, and just run the car
into a town and leave it parked with the time fuse switched on. Give
yourself a couple of hours’ start to get out of range—at least 100
miles away—and that would be that.’

Bond reached in his pocket for another cigarette. It couldn’t be, yet it
was so. Just what his Service and all the other intelligence services in
the world had been expecting to happen. The anonymous little man in the
raincoat with a heavy suitcase—or golf-bag, if you like. The left
luggage office, the parked car, the clump of bushes in a park in the
centre of a big town. And there was no answer to it. In a few years’
time, if the experts were right, there would be even less answer to it.
Every tin-pot little nation would be making atomic bombs in their
backyards, so to speak. Apparently there was no secret now about the
things. It had only been the prototypes that had been difficult—like
the first gunpowder weapons for instance, or machine-guns or tanks.
Today these were everybody’s bows and arrows. Tomorrow, or the day
after, the bows and arrows would be atomic bombs. And this was the first
blackmail case. Unless SPECTRE was stopped, the word would get round and
soon every criminal scientist with a chemical set and some scrap iron
would be doing it. If they couldn’t be stopped in time there would be
nothing for it but to pay up. Bond said so.

‘That’s about it,’ commented M. ‘From every point of view, including
politics, not that they matter all that much. But neither the PM nor the
President would last five minutes if anything went wrong. But whether we
pay or don’t pay, the consequences will be endless—and all bad. That’s
why absolutely everything has got to be done to find these people and
the plane and stop the thing in time. The PM and the President are
entirely agreed. Every intelligence man all over the world who’s on our
side is being put on to this operation—Operation _Thunderball_ they’re
calling it. Planes, ships, submarines—and of course money’s no object.
We can have everything, whenever we want it. The Cabinet have already
set up a special staff and a war-room. Every scrap of information will
be fed into it. The Americans have done the same. Some kind of a leak
can’t be helped. It’s being put about that all the panic, and it is
panic, is because of the loss of the Vindicator—bombs included,
whatever fuss that may cause politically. Only the letter will be
absolutely secret. All the usual detective work—finger-prints,
Brighton, writing paper—these’ll be looked after by Scotland Yard with
the FBI, Interpol, and all the NATO intelligence organizations helping
where they can. Only a segment of the paper and the typing will be
used—a few innocent words. This will all be quite separate from the
search for the plane. That’ll be handled as a top espionage matter. No
one should be able to connect the two investigations. MI5 will handle
the background to all the crew members and the Italian observer. That
will be a natural part of the search for the plane. As for the Service,
we’ve teamed up with the CIA to cover the world. Allen Dulles is putting
every man he’s got on to it and so am I. Just sent out a General Call.
Now all we can do is sit back and wait.’

Bond lit another cigarette, his sinful third in one hour. He said,
putting unconcern into his voice, ‘Where do I come in, sir?’

M looked vaguely at Bond, as if seeing him for the first time. Then he
swivelled his chair, and gazed again through the window at nothing.
Finally he said, in a conversational tone of voice, ‘I have committed a
breach of faith with the PM in telling you all this, 007. I was under
oath to tell no one what I have just told you. I decided to do what I
have done because I have an idea, a hunch, and I wish this idea to be
pursued by a’—he hesitated—‘by a reliable man. It seemed to me that
the only grain of possible evidence in this case was the DEW radar plot,
a doubtful one I admit, of the plane that left the East-West air channel
over the Atlantic and turned south towards Bermuda and the Bahamas. I
decided to accept this evidence, although it has not aroused much
interest elsewhere. I then spent some time studying a map and charts of
the Western Atlantic and I endeavoured to put myself in the minds of
SPECTRE—or rather, for there is certainly a master mind behind all
this, in the mind of the chief of SPECTRE: my opposite number, so to
speak. And I came to certain conclusions. I decided that a favourable
target for Bomb No 1, and for Bomb No 2, if it comes to that, would be
in America rather than in Europe. To begin with, the Americans are more
bomb-conscious than we in Europe and therefore more susceptible to
persuasion if it came to using Bomb No 2. Installations worth more than
£100,000,000, and thus targets for Bomb No 1, are more numerous in
America than in Europe, and finally guessing that SPECTRE is a European
organization, from the style of the letter and from the paper, which is
Dutch by the way, and also from the ruthlessness of the plot, it seemed
to me at least possible that an American rather than a European target
might have been chosen. Anyway, going on these assumptions, and assuming
that the plane could not have landed in America itself or off American
shores—the coastal radar network is too good—I looked for a
neighbouring area which might be suitable. And,’ M glanced round at Bond
and away again, ‘I decided on the Bahamas, the group of islands, many of
them uninhabited, surrounded mostly by shoal water over sand and
possessing only one simple radar station—and that one concerned only
with civilian air traffic and manned by local civilian personnel. South,
towards Cuba, Jamaica, and the Caribbean, offers no worthwhile targets.
Anyway it is too far from the American coastline. Northwards towards
Bermuda has the same disadvantages. But the nearest of the Bahama group
is only 200 miles—only six or seven hours in a fast motor-boat or
yacht—from the American coastline.’

Bond interrupted. ‘If you’re right, sir, why didn’t SPECTRE send their
letter to the President instead of the PM?’

‘For the sake of obscurity. To make us do what we are doing—hunting all
round the world instead of only in one part of it. And for maximum
impact. SPECTRE would realize that the arrival of the letter right on
top of the loss of the bomber would hit us in the solar plexus. It
might, they would reason, even shake the money out of us without any
further effort. The next stage of their operation, attacking target No
1, is going to be a nasty business for them. It’s going to expose their
whereabouts to a considerable extent. They’d like to collect the money
and close the operation as quickly as possible. That’s what we’ve got to
gamble on. We’ve got to push them as close to the use of No 1 bomb as we
dare in the hope that something will betray them in the next six and
three-quarter days. It’s a slim chance. I’m pinning my hopes on my
guess’—M swung his chair round to the desk—‘and on you. Well,’ he
looked hard at Bond. ‘Any comments? If not you’d better get started.
You’re booked on all New York planes from now until midnight. Then on by
BOAC. I thought of using an RAF Canberra, but I don’t want your arrival
to make any noise. You’re a rich young man looking for some property in
the islands. That’ll give you an excuse to do as much prospecting as you
want. Well?’

‘All right, sir.’ Bond got to his feet. ‘I’d rather have had somewhere
more interesting—the Iron Curtain beat for instance. I can’t help
feeling this is a bigger operation than a small unit could take on. For
my money this looks more like a Russian job. They get the experimental
plane and the bombs—they obviously want them—and throw dust in our
eyes with all this SPECTRE ballyhoo. If SMERSH was still in business,
I’d say they’d got a finger in it somewhere. Just their style. But the
Eastern Stations may pick up something on that if there’s anything in
the idea. Anything else, sir? Who do I cooperate with in Nassau?’

‘The Governor knows you’re coming. They’ve got a well-trained police
force. CIA are sending down a good man, I gather. With a communications
outfit. They’ve got more of that sort of machinery than we have. Take a
cipher machine with the Triple X setting. I want to hear every single
detail you turn up. Personal to me. Right?’

‘Right, sir.’ Bond went to the door and let himself out. There was
nothing more to be said. This looked like the biggest job the Service
had ever been given and, in Bond’s opinion, for he didn’t give much for
M’s guess, he had been relegated to the back row of the chorus. So be
it. He would get himself a good sunburn and watch the show from the
wings.

                                   ★

When Bond walked out of the building, carrying the neat leather cipher
case, an expensive movie camera perhaps, slung over his shoulder, the
man in the beige Volkswagen stopped scratching the burn-scab under his
shirt, loosened, for the tenth time, the long-barrelled forty-five in
the holster under his arm, started the car and put it in gear. He was
twenty yards behind Bond’s parked Bentley. He had no idea what the big
building was. He had simply obtained Bond’s home address from the
receptionist at Shrublands and, as soon as he got out of the Brighton
hospital, he had carefully tailed Bond. The car was hired, under an
assumed name. When he had done what had to be done he would go straight
to London Airport and take the first plane out to any country on the
Continent. Count Lippe was a sanguine individual. The job, the private
score he had to settle, presented no problem to him. He was a ruthless,
vengeful man and he had eliminated many obstreperous and perhaps
dangerous people in his life. He reasoned that, if they ever came to
hear of this, SPECTRE would not object. The overheard telephone
conversation on that first day at the clinic showed that his cover had
been broached, however slightly, and it was just conceivable that he
could be traced through his membership of the Red Lightning Tong. From
there to SPECTRE was a long step, but Sub-operator G knew that once a
cover began to run, it ran like an old sock. Apart from that, this man
must be paid off. Count Lippe had to be quits with him.

Bond was getting into his car. He had slammed the door. Sub-operator G
watched the blue smoke curl from the twin exhausts. He got moving.

On the other side of the road, and a hundred yards behind the
Volkswagen, SPECTRE No 6 slipped his goggles down over his eyes, stamped
the 500-cc. Triumph into gear and accelerated down the road. He swerved
neatly through the traffic—he had been a test rider for DKW at one time
in his post-war career—and stationed himself ten yards behind the off
rear wheel of the Volkswagen and just out of the driver’s line [of]
vision in the windscreen mirror. He had no idea why Sub-operator G was
following the Bentley, nor who the Bentley belonged to. His job was to
kill the driver of the Volkswagen. He put his hand into the leather
satchel he carried slung over his shoulder, took out the heavy
grenade—it was twice the normal military size—and watched the traffic
ahead for the right pattern to allow his getaway.

Sub-operator G was watching for a similar pattern. He also noted the
spacing on the lamp-posts on the pavement in case he might be blocked
and have to run off the road. Now the cars ahead were sparse. He stamped
his foot into the floor and driving with his left hand, drew out the
Colt with his right. Now he was up with the Bentley’s rear bumper. Now
he was alongside. The dark profile was a sitting target. With a last
quick glance ahead, he raised the gun.

It was the cheeky iron rattle of the Volkswagen’s air-cooled engine that
made Bond turn his head, and it was this minute reduction of the target
area that saved his jaw. If he had then accelerated, the second bullet
would have got him, but some blessed instinct made his foot stamp the
brake at the same time as his head ducked so swiftly that his chin hit
the horn button, nearly knocking him out. Almost simultaneously, instead
of a third shot, there came the roar of an explosion and the remains of
his windshield, already shattered, cascaded around him. The Bentley had
stopped, the engine stalled. Brakes screamed. There were shouts and the
panicky screams of horns. Bond shook his head and cautiously raised it.
The Volkswagen, one wheel still spinning, lay on its side in front of
and broadside to the Bentley. Most of the roof had been blown off.
Inside, and half sprawling into the road, was a horrible, glinting mess.
Flames were licking at the blistered paintwork. People were gathering.
Bond pulled himself together and got quickly out of his car. He shouted,
‘Stand back. The petrol tank’ll go.’ Almost as he said the words there
came a dull boom and a cloud of black smoke. The flames spurted. In the
distance, sirens sounded. Bond edged through the people and strode
quickly back towards his headquarters, his thoughts racing.

The inquiry made Bond lose two planes to New York. By the time the
police had put out the fire and had transported the bits of man and the
bits of machinery and bomb casing to the morgue it was quite clear that
they would have nothing to go on but the shoes, the number on the gun,
some fibres and shreds of clothing, and the car. The car-hire people
remembered nothing but a man with dark glasses, a driver’s licence in
the name of Johnston, and a handful of fivers. The car had been hired
three days before for one week. Plenty of people remembered the
motor-cyclist, but it seemed that he had no rear number plate. He had
gone like a bat out of hell towards Baker Street. He wore goggles.
Medium build. Nothing else.

Bond had not been able to help. He had seen nothing of the Volkswagen
driver. The roof of the Volkswagen had been too low. There had only been
a hand and the glitter of a gun.

The Secret Service asked for a copy of the police report and M
instructed that this should be sent to the Thunderball war-room. He saw
Bond briefly again, rather impatiently, as if it had all been Bond’s
fault. Then he told Bond to forget about it—it was probably something
to do with one of his past cases. A hangover of some kind. The police
would get to the bottom of it in time. The main thing was operation
Thunderball. Bond had better get a move on.

By the time Bond left the building for the second time, it had begun to
rain. One of the mechanics from the car pool at the back of the building
had done what he could, knocking out the remains of the Bentley’s
windscreen and cleaning the bits out of the car, but when he got home at
lunch-time Bond was soaked to the skin. He left the car in a near-by
garage, telephoned Rolls and his insurance company (he had got too close
to a lorry carrying steel lengths, for reinforced concrete presumably.
No, he had not got the lorry’s number. Sorry, but you know how it is
when these things happen all of a sudden), and then went home and had a
bath and changed into his dark blue tropical worsted. He packed
carefully—one large suitcase and a holdall for his underwater swimming
gear—and went through to the kitchen.

May was looking rather contrite. It seemed as if she might make another
speech. Bond held up his hand. ‘Don’t tell me, May. You were right. I
can’t do my work on carrot juice. I’ve got to be off in an hour and I
need some proper food. Be an angel and make me your kind of scrambled
eggs—four eggs. Four rashers of that American hickory-smoked bacon if
we’ve got any left, hot buttered toast—your kind, not wholemeal—and a
big pot of coffee, double strength. And bring in the drink tray.’

May looked at him, relieved but aghast. ‘Whatever happened, Mister
James?’

Bond laughed at the expression of her face. ‘Nothing, May. It just
occurred to me that life’s too short. Plenty of time to watch the
calories when one gets to heaven.’

Bond left May tut-tutting at this profanity, and went off to look to his
armament.




                                   9


                           _Multiple Requiem_

So far as SPECTRE was concerned, Plan Omega had gone exactly as Blofeld
had known it would and Phases I to III in their entirety had been
completed on schedule and without a hitch.

Giuseppe Petacchi, the late Giuseppe Petacchi, had been well chosen. At
the age of eighteen he had been co-pilot of a Focke-Wulf 200 from the
Adriatic anti-submarine patrol, one of the few hand-picked Italian
airmen who had been allowed to handle these German planes. The group was
issued with the latest German pressure mines charged with the new
Hexogen explosive just when the tide had turned in the Allied battle up
the spine of Italy. Petacchi had known where his destiny lay and had
gone into business for himself. On a routine patrol, he had shot the
pilot and the navigator, very carefully, with one .38 bullet in the back
of the head for each of them, and had brought the big plane skimming in,
just above the waves to avoid the anti-aircraft fire, to the harbour of
Bari. Then he had hung his shirt out of the cockpit as a token of
surrender and had waited for the RAF launch. He had been decorated by
the English and the Americans for this exploit and had been awarded
£10,000 from special funds for his presentation to the Allies of the
pressure mine. He had told a highly coloured story to the Intelligence
people of having been a one-man resistance ever since he had been old
enough to join the Italian Air Force, and he emerged at the end of the
war as one of Italy’s most gallant resistance heroes. From then on life
had been easy—pilot and later captain in Alitalia when it got going
again, and then back into the new Italian Air Force as colonel. His
secondment to NATO followed and then his appointment as one of the six
Italians chosen for the Advance Striking Force. But he was now
thirty-four, and it occurred to him that he had had just about enough of
flying. He especially did not care for the idea of being part of the
spearhead of NATO defences. It was time for younger men to provide the
heroics. And all his life he had had a passion for owning
things—flashy, exciting, expensive things. He had most of what he
desired—a couple of gold cigarette cases, a solid gold Rolex Oyster
Perpetual Chronometer on a flexible gold bracelet, a white convertible
Lancia Gran Turismo, plenty of sharp clothes, and all the girls he
wanted (he had once been briefly married but it had not been a success).
Now he desired, and what he desired he often got, a particular
Ghia-bodied 3,500 GT Maserati he had seen at the Milan motor show. He
also wanted Out—out of the pale green corridors of NATO, out of the air
force and, therefore, off to new worlds with a new name. Rio de Janeiro
sounded just right. But all this meant a new passport, plenty of money,
and ‘organismo’—the vital ‘organismo’.

The organismo turned up, and turned up bearing just those gifts that
Petacchi lusted for. It came in the shape of an Italian named Fonda who
was at that time No 4 in SPECTRE and who had been casing the personnel
of NATO, via Versailles and Paris night-clubs and restaurants, for just
such a man. It had taken one whole very careful month to prepare the
bait and inch it forward towards the fish and, when it was finally
presented, No 4 had been almost put off by the greed with which it had
been gobbled. There was delay while the possibility of a double-cross
was probed by SPECTRE, but finally all the lights were green and the
full proposition was laid out for inspection. Petacchi was to get on the
Vindicator training course and hi-jack the plane. (There was no mention
of atomic weapons. This was a Cuban revolutionary group who wanted to
call attention to its existence and aims by a dramatic piece of
self-advertisement. Petacchi closed his ears to this specious tale. He
didn’t mind in the least who wanted the plane so long as he was paid.)
In exchange, Petacchi would receive one million dollars, a new passport
in any name and nationality he chose, and immediate onward passage from
the point of delivery to Rio de Janeiro. Many details were discussed and
perfected, and when, at eight o’clock in the evening of that June 2nd,
the Vindicator screamed off down the runway and out over St Alban’s
Head, Petacchi was tense but confident.

For the training flights, a couple of ordinary civil aircraft seats had
been fixed inside the roomy fuselage just back of the large cockpit, and
Petacchi sat quietly for a whole hour and watched the five men at work
at the crowded dials and instruments. When it came to his turn to fly
the plane he was quite satisfied that he could dispense with all five of
them. Once he had set George, there would be nothing to do but stay
awake and make certain from time to time that he was keeping exactly at
32,000 feet, just above the transatlantic air channel. There would be a
tricky moment when he turned off the East-West channel on to the
North-South for the Bahamas, but this had all been worked out for him
and every move he would have to make was written down in the notebook in
his breast pocket. The landing was going to need very steady nerves, but
for one million dollars the steady nerves would be summoned.

For the tenth time Petacchi consulted the Rolex. Now! He verified and
tested the oxygen mask in the bulkhead beside him and laid it down
ready. Next he took the little red-ringed cylinder out of his pocket and
remembered exactly how many turns to give the release valve. Then he put
it back in his pocket and went through into the cockpit.

‘Hullo, Seppy. Enjoying the flight?’ The pilot liked the Italian. They
had gone out together on one or two majestic thrashes in Bournemouth.

‘Sure, sure.’ Petacchi asked some questions, verified the course set on
George, checked the air-speed and altitude. Now everyone in the cockpit
was relaxed, almost drowsy. Five more hours to go. Rather a bind missing
_North by North-West_ at the Odeon. But one would catch up with it at
Southampton. Petacchi stood with his back to the metal map rack that
held the log and the charts. His right hand went to his pocket, felt for
the release valve, and gave it three complete turns. He eased the
cylinder out of his pocket and slipped it behind him and down behind the
books.

Petacchi stretched and yawned. ‘Is time for a zizz,’ he said amiably. He
had got the slang phrase pat. It rolled easily off the tongue.

The navigator laughed. ‘What do they call it in Italian—“Zizzo”?’

Petacchi grinned cheerfully. He went through the open hatch, got back to
his chair, clamped on his oxygen mask, and turned the control regulator
to 100 per cent oxygen to cut out the air bleed. Then he made himself
comfortable and watched.

They had said it would take under five minutes. Sure enough, in about
two minutes, the man nearest to the map rack, the navigator, suddenly
clutched his throat and fell forward, gargling horribly. The radio
operator dropped his earphones and started forward, but with his second
step he was down on his knees. He lurched sideways and collapsed. Now
the three other men began to fight for air, briefly, terribly. The
co-pilot and the flight engineer writhed off their stools together. They
clawed vaguely at each other and then fell back, spreadeagled. The pilot
groped up towards the microphone above his head, said something
indistinctly, got half to his feet, turned slowly so that his bulging
eyes, already dead, seemed to stare through the hatchway into
Petacchi’s, and then thudded down on top of the body of his co-pilot.

Petacchi glanced at his watch. Four minutes flat. Give them one more
minute. When the minute was up, he took rubber gloves out of his pocket,
put them on and pressing the oxygen mask tight against his face and
trailing the flexible tube behind him, he went forward, reached down
into the map rack, and closed the valve on the cylinder of cyanide. He
verified George and adjusted the cabin pressurization to help clear the
poison gas. He then went back to his seat to wait for fifteen minutes.

They had said fifteen would be enough, but at the last moment he gave it
another ten and then, still with his oxygen mask on, he went forward
again and began slowly, for the oxygen made him rather breathless, to
pull the bodies back into the fuselage. When the cockpit was clear, he
took a small phial of crystals out of his trousers pocket, took out the
cork, and sprinkled the cabin floor with them. He went down on his knees
and watched the crystals. They kept their white colour. He eased his
oxygen mask away and took a small cautious sniff. There was no smell.
But still, when he took over the controls and began easing the plane
down to 32,000 and then slightly north-west-by-west to get into the
traffic lane, he kept the mask on.

The giant plane whispered on into the night. The cockpit, bright with
the yellow eyes of the dials, was quiet and warm. In the deafening
silence in the cockpit of a big jet in flight there was only the faint
buzz of an invector. As he verified the dials, the click of each switch
seemed as loud as a small-calibre pistol-shot.

Petacchi again checked George with the gyro and verified each fuel tank
to see that they were all feeding evenly. One tank pump needed
adjustment. The jet pipe temperatures were not over-heating.

Satisfied, Petacchi settled himself comfortably in the pilot’s seat and
swallowed a benzedrine tablet and thought about the future. One of the
headphones scattered on the floor of the cockpit began to chirrup
loudly. Petacchi glanced at his watch. Of course! Boscombe Air Traffic
Control was trying to raise the Vindicator. He had missed the third of
the half-hourly calls. How long would Air Control wait before alerting
Air Sea Rescue, Bomber Command, and the Air Ministry? There would first
be checks and double-checks with the Southern Rescue Centre. They would
probably take another half-hour and by that time he would be well out
over the Atlantic.

The chirrup of the headphones went quiet. Petacchi got up from his seat
and took a look at the radar screen. He watched it for some time, noting
the occasional ‘blip’ of planes being overhauled below him. Would his
own swift passage above the air corridor be noted by the planes as he
passed above them? Unlikely. The radar on commercial planes has a
limited field of vision in a forward cone. He would almost certainly not
be spotted until he crossed the Defence Early Warning line, and DEW
would probably put him down as a commercial jet that had strayed above
its normal channel.

Petacchi went back to the pilot’s seat and again minutely checked the
dials. He weaved the plane gently to get the feel of the controls.
Behind him, the bodies on the floor of the fuselage stirred uneasily.
The plane answered perfectly. It was like driving a beautiful quiet
motor-car. Petacchi dreamed briefly of the Maserati. What colour? Better
not his usual white, or anything spectacular. Dark blue with a thin red
line along the coachwork. Something quiet and respectable that would fit
in with his new, quiet identity. It would be fun to run her in some of
the trials and road races—even the Mexican ‘2,000’. But that would be
too dangerous. Supposing he won and his picture got into the papers! No.
He would have to cut out anything like that. He would only drive the car
really fast when he wanted to get a girl. They melted in a fast car. Why
was that? The sense of surrender to the machine, to the man whose
strong, sunburned hands were on the wheel? But it was always so. You
turned the car into a wood after ten minutes at 150 and you would almost
have to lift the girl out and lay her down on the moss, her limbs would
be so trembling and soft.

Petacchi pulled himself out of the daydream. He glanced at his watch.
The Vindicator was already four hours out. At 600 mph one certainly
covered the miles. The coastline of America should be on the screen by
now. He got up and had a look. Yes, there, 500 miles away, was the
coastline map already in high definition, the bulge that was Boston, and
the silvery creek of the Hudson River. No need to check his position
with weather ships Delta or Echo that would be somewhere below him. He
was dead on course and it would soon be time to turn off the East-West
channel.

Petacchi went back to his seat, munched another benzedrine tablet, and
consulted his chart. He got his hands to the controls and watched the
eerie glow of the gyro compass. Now! He eased the controls gently round
in a fairly tight curve, then he flattened out again, edged the plane
exactly on to its new course, and re-set George. Now he was flying due
south, now he was on the last lap, a bare three hours to go. It was time
to start worrying about the landing.

Petacchi took out his little notebook. ‘Watch for the lights of Grand
Bahama to port, and Palm Beach to starboard. Be ready to pick up the
navigational aids from No 1’s yacht—dot-dot-dash; dot-dot-dash,
jettison fuel, lose height to around 1,000 feet for the last quarter of
an hour, kill speed with the air brakes, and lose more height. Watch out
for the flashing red beacon and prepare for the final approach. Flaps
down only at the check altitude with about 140 knots indicated. Depth of
water will be forty feet. You will have plenty of time to get out of the
escape hatch. You will be taken on board No 1’s yacht. There is a
Bahamas Airways flight to Miami at 8.30 on the next morning and then
Braniff or Real Airlines for the rest of the way. No 1 will give you the
money in 1,000-dollar bills or in Travellers Cheques. He will have both
available, also the passport in the name of Enrico Valli, Company
Director.’

Petacchi checked his position, course, and speed. Only one more hour to
go. It was three am GMT, nine pm Nassau time. A full moon was coming up
and the carpet of clouds 10,000 feet below was a snowfield. Petacchi
dowsed the collision lights on his wing tips and fuselage. He checked
the fuel: 2,000 gallons including the reserve tanks. He would need 500
for the last four hundred miles. He pulled the release valve on the
reserve tanks and lost 1,000 gallons. With the loss of weight the plane
began to climb slowly and he corrected back to 32,000. Now there was
twenty minutes to go—time to begin the long descent. . .

                                   ★

Down through the cloud base, the moments of blindness and then, far
below, the sparse lights of North and South Bimini winked palely against
the silver sheen of the moon on the quiet sea. There were no whitecaps.
The met. report he had picked up from Vero Beach on the American
mainland had been right: ‘Dead calm, light airs from the north-east,
visibility good, no immediate likelihood of change’ and a check on the
fainter Nassau Radio had confirmed. The sea looked as smooth and as
solid as steel. This was going to be all right. Petacchi dialled Channel
67 on the pilot’s command set to pick up No 1’s navigational aid. He had
a moment’s panic when he didn’t hit it at once, but then he got it,
faint but clear—dot-dot-dash, dot-dot-dash. It was time to get right
down. Petacchi began to kill his speed with the air brakes and cut down
the four jets. The great plane began a shallow dive. The radio altimeter
became vocal, threatening. Petacchi watched it and the sea of
quicksilver below him. He had a moment when the horizon was lost. There
was so much reflection off the moonlit water. Then he was on and over a
small dark island. It gave him confidence in the 2,000 feet indicated on
the altimeter. He pulled out of the shallow dive and held the plane
steady.

Now No 1’s beacon was coming in loud and clear. Soon he would see the
red flashing light. And there it was, perhaps five miles dead ahead.
Petacchi inched the great nose of the plane down. Any moment now! It was
going to be easy! His fingers played with the controls as delicately as
if they were the erotic trigger points on a woman. Five hundred feet,
four hundred, three, two . . . there was the pale shape of the yacht,
lights dowsed. He was dead on line with the red flash of the beacon.
Would he hit it? Never mind. Inch her down, down, down. Be ready to
switch off at once. The belly of the plane gave a jolt. Up with the
nose! Crash! A leap in the air and then . . . Crash again!

Petacchi unhinged his cramped fingers from the controls, and gazed
numbly out of the window at the foam and small waves. By God he had done
it! He, Giuseppe Petacchi, had done it!

Now for the applause! Now for the rewards!

The plane was settling slowly and there was a hiss of steam from the
submerging jets. From behind him came the rip and crack of tearing metal
as the tail section gaped open where the back of the plane had broken.
Petacchi went through into the fuselage. The water swirled around his
feet. The filtering moonlight glittered white on the upturned face of
one of the corpses now soggily awash at the rear of the plane. Petacchi
broke the perspex cover to the handle of the port side emergency exit
and jerked the handle down. The door fell outwards and Petacchi stepped
through and walked out along the wing.

The big jolly-boat was almost up with the plane. There were six men in
it. Petacchi waved and shouted delightedly. One man raised a hand in
reply. The faces of the men, milk-white under the moon, looked up at him
quietly, curiously, Petacchi thought: these men are very serious, very
businesslike. It is right so. He swallowed his triumph and also looked
grave.

The boat came alongside the wing, now almost awash, and one man climbed
up on the wing and walked towards him. He was a short, thick man with a
very direct gaze. He walked carefully, his feet well apart and his knees
flexed to keep his balance. His left hand was hooked in his belt.

Petacchi said happily, ‘Good evening. Good evening. I am delivering one
plane in good condition.’ (He had thought the joke out long before.)
‘Please sign here.’ He held out his hand.

The man from the jolly-boat took the hand in a strong grasp, braced
himself, and pulled sharply. Petacchi’s head was flung back by the quick
jerk and he was looking full into the eyes of the moon as the stiletto
flashed up and under the offered chin, through the roof of the mouth,
into the brain. He knew nothing but a moment’s surprise, a sear of pain,
and an explosion of brilliant light.

The killer held in the knife for a moment, the back of his hand feeling
the stubble on Petacchi’s chin, then he lowered the body on to the wing
and withdrew the knife. He carefully rinsed the knife in the sea-water
and wiped the blade on Petacchi’s back and put the knife away. Then he
hauled the body along the wing and thrust it under water beside the
escape hatch.

The killer waded back along the wing to the waiting jolly-boat and
laconically raised a thumb. By now four of the men had pulled on their
aqualungs. One by one, with a last adjustment of their mouthpieces, they
clumsily heaved themselves over the side of the rocking boat and sank in
a foam of small bubbles. When the last man had gone, the mechanic at the
engine carefully lowered a huge underwater searchlight over the side and
paid out the cable. At a given moment he switched the light on and the
sea and the great sinking hulk of the plane were lit up with a mist of
luminescence. The mechanic slipped the idling motor into gear and backed
away, paying out cable as he went. At twenty yards, out of range of the
suction of the sinking plane, he stopped and switched off his engine. He
reached into his overalls and took out a packet of Camels. He offered
one to the killer, who took it, broke it carefully in half, put one half
behind his ear and lit the other half.

The killer was a man who rigidly controlled his weaknesses.




                                   10


                         _The ‘Disco Volante’_

On board the yacht, No 1 put down his night glasses, took a Charvet
handkerchief out of the breast pocket of his white shark-skin jacket and
dabbed gently at his forehead and temples. The musky scent of
Schiaparelli’s Snuff was reassuring, reminding him of the easy side of
life, of Dominetta who would now be sitting down to dinner—everyone
kept Spanish hours in Nassau and cocktails would not have finished
before ten—with the raffish but rather gay Saumurs and their equally
frivolous guests; of the early game that would already be under way at
the Casino; of the calypsos thudding into the night from the bars and
night-clubs on Bay Street. He put the handkerchief back in his pocket.
But this also was good—this wonderful operation! Like clockwork! He
glanced at his watch. Just ten fifteen. The plane had been a bare thirty
minutes late, a nasty half-hour to have to wait, but the landing had
been perfect. Vargas had done a good quick job on the Italian
pilot—what was his name?—so that now they were running only fifteen
minutes late. If the recovery group didn’t have to use oxy-acetylene
cutters to get out the bombs, they would soon make that up. But one
mustn’t expect no hitch at all. There was a good eight hours of darkness
to go. Calm, method, efficiency, in that order. Calm, method,
efficiency. No 1 ducked down off the bridge and went into the radio
cabin. It smelled of sweat and tension. Anything from the Nassau control
tower? Any report of a low-flying plane? Of a possible crash into the
sea off Bimini? Then keep watching and get me No 2. Quick, please. It’s
just on the quarter.

No 1 lit a cigarette and watched the yacht’s big brain get to work,
scanning the ether, listening, searching. The operator played the dials
with insect fingers, pausing, verifying, hastening on through the sound
waves of the world. Now he suddenly stopped, checked, minutely adjusted
the volume. He raised his thumb. No 1 spoke into the little sphere of
wire mesh that rose in front of his mouth from the base of the head set.
‘No 1 speaking.’

‘No 2 listening.’ The voice was hollow. The words waxed and waned. But
it was Blofeld, all right. No 1 knew that voice better than he
remembered his father’s.

‘Successful. Ten fifteen. Next phase ten forty-five. Continuing. Over.’

‘Thank you. Out.’ The sound waves went dead. The interchange had taken
forty-five seconds. No conceivable fear of interception in that time, on
that waveband.

No 1 went through the big stateroom and down into the hold. The four men
of B team, their aqualungs beside them, were sitting around smoking. The
wide underwater hatch just above the keel of the yacht was open.
Moonlight, reflected off the white sand under the ship, shone up through
the six feet of water in the hold. Stacked on the grating beside the men
was the thick pile of tarpaulin painted a very pale café-au-lait with
occasional irregular blotches of dark green and brown. No 1 said, ‘All
is going very well. The recovery team is at work. It should not be long
now. How about the chariot and the sled?’

One of the men jerked his thumb downwards. ‘They are down there. Outside
on the sand. So it will be quicker.’

‘Correct.’ No 1 nodded towards a crane-like contraption fastened to a
bulkhead above the hold. ‘The derrick took the strain all right?’

‘That chain could handle twice the weight.’

‘The pumps?’

‘In order. They will clear the hold in seven minutes.’

‘Good. Well, take it easy. It will be a long night.’ No 1 climbed the
iron ladder out of the hold and went up on deck. He didn’t need his
night glasses. Two hundred yards away to starboard the sea was empty
save for the jolly-boat riding at anchor above the golden submarine
glow. The red marker light had been taken in to the boat. The rattle of
the little generator making current for the big searchlight was loud. It
would carry far across a sea as still as this. But accumulators would
have been too bulky and might have exhausted themselves before the work
was finished. The generator was a calculated risk and a small one at
that. The nearest island was five miles away and uninhabited unless
someone was having a midnight picnic on it. The yacht had stopped and
searched it on the way to the rendezvous. Everything had been done that
could be done, every precaution taken. The wonderful machine was running
silently and full out. There was nothing to worry about now except the
next step. No 1 went through the hatch into the enclosed bridge and bent
over the lighted chart table.

Emilio Largo, No 1, was a big, conspicuously handsome man of about
forty. He was a Roman and he looked like a Roman, not from the Rome of
today, but from the Rome of the ancient coins. The large, long face was
sunburned a deep mahogany brown and the light glinted off the strong
rather hooked nose and the clean-cut lantern jaw that had been
meticulously shaved before he had started out late that afternoon. In
contrast to the hard, slow-moving brown eyes, the mouth, with its thick,
rather down-curled lips, belonged to a satyr. Ears that, from dead in
front, looked almost pointed, added to an animalness that would
devastate women. The only weakness in the fine centurion face lay in the
overlong sideburns and the too carefully waved black hair that glistened
so brightly with pomade that it might almost have been painted on to the
skull. There was no fat on the big-boned frame—Largo had fought for
Italy in the Olympic foils, was almost an Olympic class swimmer with the
Australian crawl, and only a month before had won the senior class in
the Nassau water-ski championships—the muscles bulged under the
exquisitely cut shark-skin jacket. An aid to his athletic prowess were
his hands. They were almost twice the normal size, even for a man of his
stature, and now, as they walked across the chart holding a ruler and a
pair of dividers, they looked, extruding from the white sleeves that
rested on the white chart, almost like large brown furry animals quite
separate from their owner.

Largo was an adventurer, a predator on the herd. Two hundred years
before, he would have been a pirate—not one of the jolly ones of the
story books, but a man like Blackbeard, a bloodstained cut-throat who
scythed his way through people towards gold. But Blackbeard had been too
much of a bully and a roughneck and wherever he went in the world he
left behind a telltale shambles. Largo was different. There was a cool
brain and an exquisite finesse behind his actions that had always saved
him from the herd’s revenge—from his post-war debuts as head of the
black market in Naples, through five lucrative years smuggling from
Tangier, five more masterminding the wave of big jewel robberies on the
French Riviera, down to his last five with SPECTRE. Always he got away
with it. Always he had seen the essential step ahead that would have
been hidden from lesser men. He was the epitome of the gentleman
crook—a man of the world, a great womanizer, a high liver, with the
entrée to café society in four continents, and the last survivor,
conveniently enough, of a once-famous Roman family whose fortune, so he
said, he had inherited. He also benefited from having no wife, a
spotless police record, nerves of steel, a heart of ice, and the
ruthlessness of a Himmler. He was the perfect man for SPECTRE, and the
perfect man, rich Nassau playboy and all, to be Supreme Commander of
Plan Omega.

One of the crew knocked on the hatch and came in. ‘They have signalled.
The chariot and sled are on the way.’

‘Thank you.’ In the heat and excitement of any operation, Largo always
created calm. However much was at stake, however great the dangers and
however urgent the need for speed and quick decisions, he made a fetish
of calm, of the pause, of an almost judolike inertia. This was an act of
will to which he had trained himself. He found it had an extraordinary
effect on his accomplices. It tied them to him and invoked their
obedience and loyalty more than any other factor in leadership. That he,
a clever and cunning man, should show unconcern at particularly bad, or,
as in this case, particularly good news, meant that he had already known
that what had happened would happen. With Largo, consequences were
foreseen. One could depend on him. He never lost balance. So now, at
this splendid news, Largo deliberately picked up his dividers again and
made a trace, an imaginary trace, on the chart for the sake of the crew
member. He then put down the dividers and strolled out of the
air-conditioning into the warm night.

A tiny worm of underwater light was creeping out towards the jolly-boat.
It was a two-man underwater chariot identical with those used by the
Italians during the war and bought, with improvements, from Ansaldo, the
firm that had originally invented the one-man submarine. It was towing
an underwater sled, a sharp-prowed tray with negative buoyancy used for
the recovery and transport of heavy objects under the sea. The worm of
light merged with the luminescence from the searchlight and, minutes
later, re-emerged on its way back to the ship. It would have been
natural for Largo to have gone down to the hold to witness the arrival
of the two atomic weapons. Typically, he did nothing of the sort. In due
course the little headlight reappeared, going back over its previous
course. Now the sled would be loaded with the huge tarpaulin,
camouflaged to merge in with just this piece of underwater terrain, with
its white sand and patches of coral outcrop, that would be spread so as
to cover every inch of the wrecked plane and pegged all round with
corkscrew iron stanchions that would not be shifted by the heaviest
surface storm or groundswell. In his imagination, Largo saw every move
of the eight men who would now be working far below the surface on the
reality for which there had been so much training, so many dummy
exercises. He marvelled at the effort, the incredible ingenuity, that
had gone into Plan Omega. Now all the months of preparation, of sweat
and tears, were being repaid.

There came a bright blink of light on the surface of the water not far
from the jolly-boat—then another and another. The men were surfacing.
As they did so, the moon caught the glass of their masks. They swam to
the boat—Largo verified that all eight were there—and clumsily heaved
up the short ladder and over the side. The mechanic, and Brandt the
German killer, helped them off with their gear, the underwater light was
switched off and hauled inboard and, instead of the rattle of the
generator, there came the muffled roar of the twin Johnsons. The boat
sped back to the yacht and to the waiting arms of the derricks. The
couplings were made firm and verified, and with a shrill electric whine,
the boat, complete with passengers, was swung up and inboard.

The captain came and stood at Largo’s side. He was a big, sullen,
rawboned man who had been cashiered from the Canadian Navy for
drunkenness and insubordination. He had been a slave to Largo ever since
Largo had called him to the stateroom one day and broken a chair over
his head on account of a questioned command. That was the kind of
discipline he understood. Now he said, ‘The hold’s clear. Okay to sail?’

‘Are both the teams satisfied?’

‘They say so. Not a hitch.’

‘First see they all get one full jigger of whisky. Then tell them to
rest. They will be going out again in just about an hour. Ask Kotze to
have a word with me. Be ready to sail in five minutes.’

‘Okay.’

The eyes of the physicist, Kotze, were bright under the moon. Largo
noticed that he was trembling slightly as if with fever. He tried to
instil calm into the man. He said cheerfully, ‘Well, my friend. Are you
pleased with your toys? The toy-shop has sent you everything you want?’

Kotze’s lips trembled. He was on the verge of excited tears. He said,
his voice high. ‘It is tremendous! You have no idea. Weapons such as I
had never dreamed of. And of a simplicity—a safety! Even a child could
handle these things without danger.’

‘The cradles were big enough for them? You have room to do your work?’

‘Yes, yes.’ Kotze almost flapped his hands with enthusiasm. ‘There are
no problems, none at all. The fuses will be off in no time. It will be a
simple matter to replace them with the time mechanism. Maslov is already
at work correcting the threads. I am using lead screws. They are more
easy to machine.’

‘And the two plugs—these ignitors you were telling me about? They are
safe? Where did the divers find them?’

‘They were in a leaden box under the pilot’s seat. I have verified them.
Perfectly simple when the time comes. They will of course be kept apart
in the hiding place. The rubber bags are splendid. Just what was needed.
I have verified that they seal completely watertight.’

‘No danger from radiation?’

‘Not now. Everything is in the leaden cases.’ Kotze shrugged. ‘I may
have picked up a little while I was working on the monsters but I wore
the harness. I will watch for signs. I know what to do.’

‘You are a brave man, Kotze. I won’t go near the damned things until I
have to. I value my sex-life too much. So you are satisfied with
everything? You have no problems? Nothing has been left on the plane?’

Kotze had got himself under control. He had been bursting with the news,
with his relief that the technical problems were within his power. Now
he felt empty, tired. He had voided himself of the tensions that had
been with him for weeks. After all this planning, all these dangers,
supposing his knowledge had not been enough! Supposing the bloody
English had invented some new safety device, some secret control, of
which he knew nothing! But when the time came, when he unwrapped the
protective webbing and got to work with his jeweller’s tools, then
triumph and gratitude had flooded into him. No, now there were no
problems. Everything was all right. Now there was only routine. Kotze
said dully, ‘No. There are no problems. Everything is there. I will go
and get the job finished.’

Largo watched the thin figure shamble off along the deck. Scientists
were queer fish. They saw nothing but science. Kotze couldn’t visualize
the risks that still had to be run. For him the turning of a few screws
was the end of the job. For the rest of the time he would be a useless
supercargo. It would be easier to get rid of him. But that couldn’t be
done yet. He would have to be kept on just in case the weapons had to be
used. But he was a depressing little man and a near hysteric. Largo
didn’t like such people near him. They lowered his spirits. They smelled
of bad luck. Kotze would have to be found some job in the engine room
where he could be kept busy and, above all, out of sight.

Largo went into the cockpit bridge. The captain was sitting at the
wheel, a light aluminium affair consisting only of the bottom half of a
circle. Largo said, ‘Okay. Let’s go.’ The captain reached out his hand
to the bank of buttons at his side and pressed the one that said ‘_Start
Both_’. There came a low, hollow rumble from amidships. A light blinked
on the panel to show that both engines were firing properly. The captain
pulled the electro-magnetic gear shift to ‘_Slow Ahead Both_’ and the
yacht began to move. The captain made it ‘_Full Ahead Both_’ and the
yacht trembled and settled a little in the stern. The captain watched
the revolution counter, his hand on a squat lever at his side. At twenty
knots the counter showed 5,000. The captain inched back the lever that
depressed the great steel scoop below the hull. The revolutions remained
the same, but the finger of the speedometer crawled on round the dial
until it said forty knots. Now the yacht was half-flying, half-planing
across the glittering sheet of still water, the hull supported four feet
above the surface on the broad, slightly uptilted metal skid and with
only a few feet of the stern and the two big screws submerged. It was a
glorious sensation and Largo, as he always did, thrilled to it.

The motor yacht, _Disco Volante_, was a hydrofoil craft, built for Largo
with SPECTRE funds by the Italian constructors, Leopoldo Rodrigues, of
Messina, the only firm in the world to have successfully adapted the
Shertel-Sachsenberg system to commercial use. With a hull of aluminium
and magnesium alloy, two Daimler-Benz four-stroke diesels supercharged
by twin Brown-Boveri turbo superchargers, the _Disco Volante_ could move
her 100 tons at around fifty knots, with a cruising range at that speed
of around four hundred miles. She had cost £200,000, but she had been
the only craft in the world with the speed, cargo and passenger space,
and with the essential shallow draft for the job required of her in
Bahamian waters.

The constructors claim of this type of craft that it has a particular
refinement that SPECTRE had appreciated. Having high stability and a
shallow draft, _Aliscafos_, as they are called in Italy, do not
determine magnetic field variation, nor do they cause pressure
waves—both desirable characteristics, in case the _Disco Volante_ might
wish, some time in her career, to escape detection.

Six months before, the _Disco_ had been shipped out to the Florida Keys
by the South Atlantic route. She had been a sensation in Florida waters
and among the Bahamas, and had vastly helped to make Largo the most
popular ‘millionaire’ in a corner of the world that crawls with
millionaires who ‘have everything’. And the fast and mysterious voyages
he made in the _Disco_, with all those underwater swimmers and
occasionally with a two-seater Lycoming-engined folding-wing amphibian
mounted on the roof of the streamlined superstructure, had aroused just
the right amount of excited comment. Slowly, Largo had let the secret
leak out—through his own discretions at dinners and cocktail parties,
through carefully primed members of the crew in the Bay Street bars.
This was a treasure hunt, an important one. There was a pirates’ map, a
sunken galleon thickly overgrown with coral. The wreck had been located.
Largo was only waiting for the end of the winter tourist season and for
the calms of early summer and then his shareholders would be coming out
from Europe and work would begin in earnest. And two days before, the
shareholders, nineteen of them, had duly come trickling in to Nassau by
different routes—from Bermuda, from New York, from Miami. Rather dull
looking people to be sure, just the sort of hard-headed, hard-working
businessmen who would be amused by a gamble like this, a pleasant
sunshine gamble with a couple of weeks’ holiday in Nassau to make up for
it if the doubloons were after all not in the wreck. And that evening,
with all the visitors on board, the engines of the _Disco_ had begun to
murmur, just when they should have, the harbour folk agreed, just when
it was getting dark, and the beautiful dark blue and white yacht had
slid out of harbour. Once in the open sea, the engines had started up
their deep booming that had gradually diminished to the south-east,
towards, the listeners agreed, an entirely appropriate hunting ground.

The southerly course was considered appropriate because it is among the
Southern Bahamas that the great local treasure troves are expected to be
found. It was through the southerly passages through these islands—the
Crooked Island, the Mayaguana and the Caicos passages—that the Spanish
treasure ships would try to dodge the pirates and the French and British
fleets as they made for home. Here, it is believed, lie the remains of
the _Porto Pedro_, sunk in 1668, with a million pounds of bullion on
board. The _Santa Cruz_, lost in 1694, carried twice as much, and the
_El Capitan_ and _San Pedro_, both sunk in 1719, carried a million, and
half a million, pounds of treasure respectively.

Every year, treasure hunts for these and other ships are carried out
among the Southern Bahamas. No one can guess how much, if anything, has
been recovered, but everyone in Nassau knows of the 72-lb. silver bar
recovered by two Nassau businessmen off Gorda Cay in 1950, and since
presented to the Nassau Development Board, in whose offices it is
permanently on view. So all Bahamians know that treasure is there for
the finding, and when the harbour folk of Nassau heard the deep boom of
the _Disco’s_ engines dying away to the south, they nodded wisely.

But once the _Disco_ was well away and the moon had not yet risen, with
all lights doused, she swung away in a wide circle towards the west and
towards the rendezvous point she was now leaving. Now she was a hundred
miles, two hours, away from Nassau. But it would be almost dawn when,
after one more vital call, Nassau would again hear the boom of her
engines coming in from the false southern trail.

Largo got up and bent over the chart table. They had covered the course
many times and in all weathers. It was really no problem. But Phases I
and II had gone so well that double care must be taken over Phase III.
Yes, all was well. They were dead on course. Fifty miles. They would be
there in an hour. He told the captain to keep the yacht as she was, and
went below to the radio room. Eleven fifteen was just coming up. It was
call time.

The small island, Dog Island, was no bigger than two tennis courts. It
was a hunk of dead coral with a smattering of sea-grape and battered
screw palm that grew on nothing but pockets of brackish rainwater and
sand. It was the point where the Dog Shoal broke the surface, a
well-known navigational hazard that even the fishing boats kept well
away from. In daylight, Andros Island showed to eastwards, but at night
it was as safe as houses.

The _Disco_ came up fast and then slowly lowered herself back into the
water and slid up within a cable’s length of the rock. Her arrival
brought small waves that lapped and sucked at the rock and then were
still. The anchor slipped silently down forty feet and held. Down in the
hold, Largo and the disposal team of four waited for the underwater
hatch to be opened.

The five men wore aqualungs. Largo held nothing but a powerful
underwater electric torch. The four others were divided into two pairs.
They wore webbing slung between them and they sat on the edge of the
iron grating with their frogman’s feet dangling, waiting for the water
to swirl in and give them buoyancy. On the webbing, between each pair,
rested a six-foot-long tapering object in an obscene grey rubber
envelope.

The water seeped, rushed, and then burst into the hold, submerging the
five men. They slipped off their seats and trudged out through the
hatchway, Largo in the lead and the two pairs behind him at precisely
tested intervals.

Largo did not at first switch on his torch. It was not necessary and it
would bring stupid, dazed fish that were a distraction. It might even
bring shark or barracuda and, though they would be no more than a
nuisance, one of the team, despite Largo’s assurances, might lose his
nerve.

They swam on in the soft moonlit mist of the sea. At first there was
nothing but a milky void below them, but then the coral shelf of the
island showed up, climbing steeply towards the surface. Sea fans, like
small shrouds in the moonlight, waved softly, beckoning, and the clumps
and trees of coral were grey and enigmatic. It was because of these
things, the harmless underwater mysteries that make the skin crawl on
the inexperienced, that Largo had decided to lead the disposal teams
himself. Out in the open, where the plane had foundered, the eye of the
big searchlight made, with the known object of the plane itself, the
underwater world into the semblance of a big room. But this was
different. This grey-white world needed the contempt of a swimmer who
had experienced these phantom dangers a thousand times before. That was
the main reason why Largo led the teams. He also wanted to know exactly
how the two grey sausages were stored away. It could happen, if things
went wrong, that he would have to salvage them himself.

The underpart of the small island had been eroded by the waves so that,
seen from below, it resembled a thick mushroom. Under the umbrella of
coral there was a wide fissure, a dark wound in the side of the stem.
Largo made for it and, when he was close, switched on his torch. Beneath
the umbrella of coral it was dark. The yellow light of the torch showed
up the minute life of an inshore coral community—the pale sea urchins
and the fierce black spines of sea eggs, the shifting underbrush of
seaweeds, the yellow and blue seeking antennae of a langouste, the
butterfly and angel fish, fluttering like moths in the light, a coiled
_bêche de mer_, a couple of meandering sea-caterpillars and the black
and green jelly of a sea-hare.

Largo lowered the black fins on his feet, got his balance on a ledge,
and looked round, shining his torch on the rock so that the two teams
could get a foothold. Then he waved them on and into the smooth broad
fissure that showed a glimmer of moonlight at its far end inside the
centre of the rock. The underwater cave was only about ten yards long.
Largo led the teams one after the other through and into the small
chamber that might once perhaps have been a wonderful repository for a
different kind of treasure. From the chamber a narrow fissure led to the
upper air and this would certainly become a fine blow-hole in a storm,
though it would be unlikely that fishermen would be close enough to the
Dog Shoal in a storm to see the water fountaining out of the centre of
the island. Above the present waterline in the chamber, Largo’s men had
hammered stanchions into the rock to form cradles for the two atomic
weapons with leather straps to hold them secure against any weather.
Now, one by one, the two teams lifted the rubber packages up on the iron
bars and made them secure. Largo examined the result and was satisfied.
The weapons would be ready for him when he needed them. In the meantime
such radiation as there was would be quarantined within this tiny rock a
hundred miles from Nassau and his men and his ship would be clean and
innocent as snow.

The five men trudged calmly back to the ship and into the hold through
the hatch. To the boom of the engines the bows of the _Disco_ lifted
slowly out of the water and the beautiful ship, streamlined like the
gondola of some machine of the air rather than of the sea, skimmed off
on the homeward journey.

Largo stripped off his equipment, and with a towel round his slim waist,
went for’ard to the radio cabin. He had missed the midnight call. It was
now one fifteen—seven fifteen in the morning for Blofeld.

Largo thought of this while contact was being made. Blofeld would be
sitting there, haggard perhaps, probably unshaven. There would be coffee
beside him, the last of an endless chain of cups. Largo could smell it.
Now Blofeld would be able to take a taxi to the Turkish baths in the Rue
Aubert, his resort when there were tensions to be dissipated. And there,
at least, he would sleep.

‘Number 1 speaking.’

‘Number 2 listening.’

‘Phase III completed. Phase III completed. Successful. One am here.
Closing down.’

‘I am satisfied.’

Largo stripped off the earphones. He thought to himself, ‘So am I! We
are more than three-quarters home. Now only the devil can stop us.’

He went in to the stateroom and carefully made himself a tall glass of
his favourite drink—crème de menthe frappé with a maraschino cherry on
top.

He sipped it delicately to the end and ate the cherry. Then he took one
more cherry out of the bottle, slipped it into his mouth, and went up on
the bridge.




                                   11


                                _Domino_

The girl in the sapphire blue MG two-seater shot down the slope of
Parliament Street and at the junction with Bay Street executed an
admirable racing change through third into second. She gave a quick
glance to the right, correctly estimated the trot of the straw-hatted
horse in the shafts of the rickety cab with the gay fringe, and swerved
out of the side street left-handed. The horse jerked back his head
indignantly and the coachman stamped his foot up and down on the big
Bermuda bell. The disadvantage of the beautiful deep ting-tong,
ting-long of the Bermuda carriage bell is that it cannot possibly sound
angry, however angrily you may sound it. The girl gave a cheerful wave
of a sunburned hand, raced up the street in second, and stopped in front
of The Pipe of Peace, the Dunhills of Nassau.

Not bothering to open the low door of the MG, the girl swung one brown
leg and then the other over the side of the car, showing her thighs
under the pleated cream cotton skirt almost to her waist, and slipped to
the pavement. By now the cab was alongside. The cabby reined in. He was
mollified by the gaiety and beauty of the girl. He said, ‘Missy, you
done almost shaved de whiskers off of Old Dreamy here. You wanna be more
careful.’

The girl put her hands on her hips. She didn’t like being told anything
by anyone. She said sharply, ‘Old Dreamy yourself. Some people have got
work to do. Both of you ought to be put out to grass instead of
cluttering up the streets getting in everyone’s way.’

The ancient Negro opened his mouth, thought better of it, said a
pacifying ‘Hokay, Missy. Hokay’, flicked at his horse and moved on,
muttering to himself. He turned on his seat to get another look at the
she-devil, but she had already disappeared into the shop. ‘Dat’s a fine
piece of gal,’ he said inconsequentially, and put his horse into an
ambling trot.

Twenty yards away, James Bond had witnessed the whole scene. He felt the
same way about the girl as the cabby did. He also knew who she was. He
quickened his step and pushed through the striped sun-blinds into the
blessed cool of the tobacconist’s.

The girl was standing at a counter arguing with one of the assistants.
‘But I tell you I don’t want Senior Service. I tell you I want a
cigarette that’s so disgusting that I shan’t want to smoke it. Haven’t
you got a cigarette that stops people smoking? Look at all that.’ She
waved a hand towards the stacked shelves. ‘Don’t tell me some of those
don’t taste horrible.’

The man was used to crazy tourists and anyway the Nassavian doesn’t get
excited. He said, ‘Well, Mam . . .’ and turned and languidly looked
along the shelves.

Bond said sternly to the girl, ‘You can choose between two kinds of
cigarette if you want to smoke less.’

She looked sharply up at him. ‘And who might you be?’

‘My name’s Bond, James Bond. I’m the world’s authority on giving up
smoking. I do it constantly. You’re lucky I happen to be handy.’

The girl looked him up and down. He was a man she hadn’t seen before in
Nassau. He was about six feet tall and somewhere in his middle thirties.
He had dark, rather cruel good looks and very clear blue-grey eyes that
were now observing her inspection sardonically. A scar down his right
cheek showed pale against a tan so mild that he must have only recently
come to the island. He was wearing a very dark blue lightweight
single-breasted suit over a cream silk shirt and a black knitted silk
tie. Despite the heat, he looked cool and clean, and his only concession
to the tropics appeared to be the black saddle-stitched sandals on his
bare feet.

It was an obvious attempt at a pick-up. He had an exciting face, and
authority. She decided to go along. But she wasn’t going to make it
easy. She said coldly, ‘All right. Tell me.’

‘The only way to stop smoking is to stop it and not start again. If you
want to _pretend_ to stop for a week or two, it’s no good trying to
ration yourself. You’ll become a bore and think about nothing else. And
you’ll snatch at a cigarette every time the hour strikes or whatever the
intervals may be. You’ll behave greedily. That’s unattractive. The other
way is to have cigarettes that are either too mild or too strong. The
mild ones are probably the best for you.’ Bond said to the attendant. ‘A
carton of Dukes, king-size with filter.’ Bond handed them to the girl.
‘Here, try these. With the compliments of Faust.’

‘Oh, but I can’t. I mean . . .’

But Bond had already paid for the carton and for a packet of
Chesterfields for himself. He took the change and followed her out of
the shop. They stood together under the striped awning. The heat was
terrific. The white light on the dusty street, the glare reflected back
off the shop fronts opposite and off the dazzling limestone of the
houses made them both screw up their eyes. Bond said, ‘I’m afraid
smoking goes with drinking. Are you going to give them both up or one by
one?’

She looked at him quizzically. ‘This is very sudden, Mr—er—Bond. Well,
all right. But somewhere out of the town. It’s too hot here. Do you know
The Wharf out beyond the Fort Montague?’ Bond noticed that she looked
quickly up and down the street. ‘It’s not bad. Come on. I’ll take you
there. Mind the metal. It’ll raise blisters on you.’

Even the white leather of the upholstery burned through to Bond’s
thighs. But he wouldn’t have minded if his suit had caught fire. This
was his first sniff at the town and already he had got hold of the girl.
And she was a fine girl at that. Bond caught hold of the leather-bound
safety grip on the dashboard as the girl did a sharp turn up Frederick
Street and another one on to Shirley.

Bond settled himself sideways so that he could look at her. She wore a
gondolier’s broadrimmed straw hat, tilted impudently down her nose. The
pale blue tails of its ribbon streamed out behind. On the front of the
ribbon was printed in gold ‘MV DISCO VOLANTE’. Her short-sleeved silk
shirt was in half-inch vertical stripes of pale blue and white and, with
the pleated cream skirt, the whole get-up reminded Bond vaguely of a
sunny day at Henley Regatta. She wore no rings and no jewellery except
for a rather masculine square gold wrist-watch with a black face. Her
flat-heeled sandals were of white doeskin. They matched her broad white
doeskin belt and the sensible handbag that lay, with a black and white
striped silk scarf, on the seat between them. Bond knew a good deal
about her from the immigration form, one among a hundred, which he had
been studying that morning. Her name was Dominetta Vitali. She had been
born in Bolzano in the Italian Tyrol and therefore probably had as much
Austrian as Italian blood in her. She was twenty-nine and gave her
profession as ‘actress’. She had arrived six months before in the
_Disco_ and it was entirely understood that she was mistress to the
owner of the yacht, an Italian called Emilio Largo. ‘Whore’, ‘tart’,
‘prostitute’ were not words Bond used about women unless they were
professional streetwalkers or the inmates of a brothel, and when
Harling, the Commissioner of Police, and Pitman, Chief of Immigration
and Customs, had described her as an ‘Italian tart’ Bond had reserved
judgement. Now he knew he had been right. This was an independent, a
girl of authority and character. She might like the rich, gay life, but
so far as Bond was concerned, that was the right kind of girl. She might
sleep with men, obviously did, but it would be on her terms and not on
theirs.

Women are often meticulous and safe drivers, but they are very seldom
first-class. In general Bond regarded them as a mild hazard and he
always gave them plenty of road and was ready for the unpredictable.
Four women in a car he regarded as the highest potential danger, and two
women nearly as lethal. Women together cannot keep silent in a car, and
when women talk they have to look into each other’s faces. An exchange
of words is not enough. They have to see the other person’s expression,
perhaps in order to read behind the other’s words or to analyse the
reaction to their own. So two women in the front seat of a car
constantly distract each other’s attention from the road ahead and four
women are more than doubly dangerous, for the driver not only has to
hear, and see, what her companion is saying, but also, for women are
like that, what the two behind are talking about.

But this girl drove like a man. She was entirely focused on the road
ahead and on what was going on in her driving mirror, an accessory
rarely used by women except for making up their faces. And, equally rare
in a woman, she took a man’s pleasure in the feel of her machine, in the
timing of her gear changes, and the use of her brakes.

She didn’t talk to Bond or seem to be aware of him, and this allowed him
to continue his inspection without inhibition. She had a gay,
to-hell-with-you face that, Bond thought, would become animal in
passion. In bed she would fight and bite and then suddenly melt into hot
surrender. He could almost see the proud, sensual mouth bare away from
the even white teeth in a snarl of desire and then, afterwards, soften
into a half-pout of loving slavery. In profile the eyes were soft
charcoal slits such as you see on some birds, but in the shop Bond had
seen them full face. Then they had been fierce and direct with a golden
flicker in the dark brown that held much the same message as the mouth.
The profile, the straight, small uptilted nose, the determined set of
the chin, and the clean-cut sweep of the jawline were as decisive as a
royal command, and the way the head was set on the neck had the same
authority—the poise one associates with imaginary princesses. Two
features modified the clean-cut purity of line—a soft, muddled Brigitte
Bardot haircut that escaped from under the straw hat in endearing
disarray, and two deeply cut but soft dimples which could only have been
etched by a sweet if rather ironic smile that Bond had not yet seen. The
sunburn was not overdone and her skin had none of that dried, exhausted
sheen that can turn the texture of even the youngest skin into something
more like parchment. Beneath the gold, there was an earthy warmth in the
cheeks that suggested a good healthy peasant strain from the Italian
Alps and her breasts, high-riding and deeply V-ed, were from the same
stock. The general impression, Bond decided, was of a wilful,
high-tempered, sensual girl—a beautiful Arab mare who would only allow
herself to be ridden by a horseman with steel thighs and velvet hands,
and then only with curb and saw bit—and then only when he had broken
her to bridle and saddle. Bond thought that he would like to try his
strength against hers. But that must be for some other time. For the
moment another man was in the saddle. He would first have to be
unhorsed. And anyway, what the hell was he doing fooling with these
things? There was a job to be done. The devil of a job.

The MG swept out of Shirley Street on to Eastern Road and followed the
coast. Across the wide harbour entrance were the emerald and turquoise
shoals of Athol Island. A deep-sea fishing boat was passing over them,
the two tall antennae of her twelve-foot rods streaming their lines
astern. A fast motor-boat came hammering by close in shore, the
water-skier on the line behind her executing tight slaloms across the
waves of her wake. It was a sparkling, beautiful day and Bond’s heart
lifted momentarily from the trough of indecision and despondency created
by an assignment that, particularly since his arrival at dawn that day,
seemed increasingly time-wasting and futile.

The Bahamas, the string of a thousand islands that straggle five hundred
miles south-east from just east of the coast of Florida to just north of
Cuba, from latitude 27° down to latitude 21°, were, for most of three
hundred years, the haunt of every famous pirate of the Western Atlantic,
and today tourism makes full use of the romantic mythology. A road sign
said ‘_Blackbeard’s Tower 1 mile_’ and another ‘_Gunpowder Wharf. Sea
Food. Native Drinks. Shady Garden, First Left_’.

A sand track showed on their left. The girl took it and pulled up in
front of a ruined stone warehouse against which leant a pink clapboard
house with white window-frames and a white Adam style doorway over which
hung a brightly painted inn sign of a powder keg with a skull and
crossbones on it. The girl drove the MG into the shade of a clump of
casuarinas and they got out and went through the door and through a
small dining-room with red and white checked covers and out on to a
terrace built on the remains of a stone wharf. The terrace was shaded by
sea-almond trees trimmed into umbrellas. Trailed by a shuffling coloured
waiter with soup stains down his white coat, they chose a cool table on
the edge of the terrace looking over the water. Bond glanced at his
watch. He said to the girl, ‘It’s exactly midday. Do you want to drink
solid or soft?’

The girl said, ‘Soft. I’ll have a double Bloody Mary with plenty of
Worcester sauce.’

Bond said, ‘What do you call hard? I’ll have a vodka and tonic with a
dash of bitters.’ The waiter said, ‘Yassuh,’ and mooched away.

‘I call vodka-on-the-rocks hard. All that tomato juice makes it soft.’
She hooked a chair towards her with one foot and stretched out her legs
on it so that they were in the sun. The position wasn’t comfortable
enough. She kicked off her sandals and sat back, satisfied. She said.
‘When did you arrive? I haven’t seen you about. When it’s like this, at
the end of the season, one expects to know most of the faces.’

‘I got in this morning. From New York. I’ve come to look for a property.
It struck me that now would be better than in the season. When all the
millionaires are here the prices are hopeless. They may come down a bit
now they’re gone. How long have you been here?’

‘About six months. I came out in a yacht, the _Disco Volante_. You may
have seen her. She’s anchored up the coast. You probably flew right over
her coming in to land at Windsor Field.’

‘A long low streamlined affair? Is she yours? She’s got beautiful
lines.’

‘She belongs to a relative of mine.’ The eyes watched Bond’s face.

‘Do you stay on board?’

‘Oh no. We’ve got a beach property. Or rather we’ve taken it. It’s a
place called Palmyra. Just opposite where the yacht is. It belongs to an
Englishman. I believe he wants to sell it. It’s very beautiful. And it’s
a long way away from the tourists. It’s at a place called Lyford Key.’

‘That sounds the sort of place I’m looking for.’

‘Well, we’ll be gone in about a week.’

‘Oh.’ Bond looked into her eyes. ‘I’m sorry.’

‘If you’ve got to flirt, don’t be obvious.’ Suddenly the girl laughed.
She looked contrite. The dimples remained. ‘I mean, I didn’t really mean
that—not the way it sounded. But I’ve spent six months listening to
that kind of thing from these silly old rich goats and the only way to
shut them up is to be rude. I’m not being conceited. There’s no one
under sixty in this place. Young people can’t afford it. So any woman
who hasn’t got a harelip or a moustache—well not even a moustache would
put them off. They’d probably like it. Well I mean absolutely any girl
makes these old goats get their bifocals all steamed up.’ She laughed
again. She was getting friendly. ‘I expect you’ll have just the same
effect on the old women with pince-nez and blue rinses.’

‘Do they eat boiled vegetables for lunch?’

‘Yes, and they drink carrot juice and prune juice.’

‘We won’t get on then. I won’t sink lower than conch chowder.’

She looked at him curiously. ‘You seem to know a lot about Nassau.’

‘You mean about conch being an aphrodisiac? That’s not only a Nassau
idea. It’s all over the world where there are conchs.’

‘Is it true?’

‘Island people have it on their wedding night. I haven’t found it have
any effect on me.’

‘Why?’ She looked mischievous. ‘Are you married?’

‘No.’ Bond smiled across into her eyes. ‘Are you?’

‘No.’

‘Then we might both try some conch soup some time and see what happens.’

‘That’s only a little better than the millionaires. You’ll have to try
harder.’

The drinks came. The girl stirred hers with a finger, to mix in the
brown sediment of Worcester sauce, and drank half of it. She reached for
the carton of Dukes, broke it open, and slit a packet with her
thumbnail. She took out a cigarette, sniffed it cautiously, and lit it
with Bond’s lighter. She inhaled deeply and blew out a long plume of
smoke. She said doubtfully, ‘Not bad. At least the smoke looks like
smoke. Why did you say you were such an expert on giving up smoking?’

‘Because I’ve given it up so often.’ Bond thought it time to get away
from the small-talk. He said, ‘Why do you talk such good English? Your
accent sounds Italian.’

‘Yes, my name’s Dominetta Vitali. But I was sent to school in England.
To the Cheltenham Ladies College. Then I went to RADA to learn acting.
The English kind of acting. My parents thought that was a ladylike way
to be brought up. Then they were both killed in a train crash. I went
back to Italy to earn my living. I remembered my English but’—she
laughed without bitterness—‘I soon forgot most of the rest. You don’t
get far in the Italian theatre by being able to walk about with a book
balanced on your head.’

‘But this relative with the yacht.’ Bond looked out to sea. ‘Wasn’t he
there to look after you?’

‘No.’ The answer was curt. When Bond made no comment she added, ‘He’s
not exactly a relative, not a close one. He’s a sort of close friend. A
guardian.’

‘Oh yes.’

‘You must come and visit us on the yacht.’ She felt that a bit of gush
was needed. ‘He’s called Largo, Emilio Largo. You’ve probably heard.
He’s here on some kind of a treasure hunt.’

‘Really?’ Now it was Bond’s turn to gush. ‘That sounds rather fun. Of
course I’d like to meet him. What’s it all about? Is there anything in
it?’

‘Heaven knows. He’s very secretive about it. Apparently there’s some
kind of a map. But I’m not allowed to see it and I have to stay ashore
when he goes off prospecting or whatever he does. A lot of people have
put up money for it, sort of shareholders. They’ve all just arrived. As
we’re going in a week or so, I suppose everything’s ready and the real
hunt’s going to start any moment now.’

‘What are the shareholders like? Do they seem sensible sort of people?
The trouble with most treasure hunts is that either someone’s been there
before and sneaked off with the treasure or the ship’s so deep in the
coral you can’t get at it.’

‘They seem all right. Very dull and rich. Terribly serious for something
as romantic as treasure-hunting. They seem to spend all their time with
Largo. Plotting and planning I suppose. And they never seem to go out in
the sun or go bathing or anything. It’s as if they didn’t want to get
sunburned. As far as I can gather, none of them have ever been in the
tropics before. Just a typical bunch of stuffy businessmen. They’re
probably better than that. I haven’t seen much of them. Largo’s giving a
party for them at the Casino tonight.’

‘What do you do all day?’

‘Oh, I fool around. Do a bit of shopping for the yacht. Drive around in
the car. Bathe on other people’s beaches when their houses are empty. I
like underwater swimming. I’ve got an aqualung and I take one of the
crew out or a fisherman. The crew are better. They all do it.’

‘I used to do it a bit. I’ve brought my gear. Will you show me some good
bits of reef some time?’

The girl looked pointedly at her watch. ‘I might do. It’s time I went.’
She got up. ‘Thanks for the drink. I’m afraid I can’t take you back. I’m
going the other way. They’ll get you a taxi here.’ She shuffled her feet
into her sandals.

Bond followed the girl through the restaurant to her car. She got in and
pressed the starter. Bond decided to risk another snub. He said,
‘Perhaps I’ll see you at the Casino tonight, Dominetta.’

‘P’raps.’ She put the car pointedly into gear. She took another look at
him. She decided that she did want to see him again. She said, ‘But for
God’s sake don’t call me Dominetta. I’m never called that. People call
me Domino.’ She gave him a brief smile, but it was a smile into the
eyes. She raised a hand. The rear wheels spat sand and gravel and the
little blue car whirled out along the driveway to the main road. It
paused at the intersection and then, as Bond watched, turned
right-handed towards Nassau.

Bond smiled. He said, ‘Bitch,’ and walked back into the restaurant to
pay his bill and have a taxi called.




                                   12


                         _The Man from the CIA_

The taxi took Bond out to the airport at the other end of the island by
the Interfield Road. The man from the Central Intelligence Agency was
due in by Pan American at 1.15. His name was Larkin, F. Larkin. Bond
hoped he wouldn’t be a muscle-bound ex-college man with a crew-cut and a
desire to show up the incompetence of the British, the backwardness of
their little Colony, and the clumsy ineptitude of Bond, in order to gain
credit with his chief in Washington. Bond hoped that at any rate he
would bring the equipment he had asked for before he left London through
Section A, who looked after the liaison with CIA. This was the latest
transmitter and receiver for agents in the field, so that the two of
them could be independent of cable offices and have instant
communication with London and Washington, and the most modern portable
Geiger counters for operating both on land and under water. One of the
chief virtues of CIA, in Bond’s estimation, was the excellence of their
equipment, and he had no false pride about borrowing from them.

New Providence, the island containing Nassau, the capital of the
Bahamas, is a drab sandy slab of land fringed with some of the most
beautiful beaches in the world. But the interior is nothing but a waste
of low-lying scrub, casuarinas, mastic, and poison-wood with a large
brackish lake at the western end. There are birds and tropical flowers
and palm trees, imported fully grown from Florida, in the beautiful
gardens of the millionaires round the coast, but in the middle of the
island there is nothing to attract the eye but the skeleton fingers of
spidery windmill pumps sticking up above the pine barrens, and Bond
spent the ride to the airport reviewing the morning.

He had arrived at seven am to be met by the Governor’s ADC—a mild error
of security—and taken to the Royal Bahamian, a large old-fashioned
hotel to which had recently been applied a thin veneer of American
efficiency and tourist gimmicks—iced water in his room, a
Cellophane-wrapped basket of dingy fruit ‘with the compliments of the
Manager’, and a strip of ‘sanitized’ paper across the lavatory seat.
After a shower and a tepid, touristy breakfast on his balcony
overlooking the beautiful beach, he had gone up to Government House at
nine o’clock for a meeting with the Commissioner of Police, the Chief of
Immigration and Customs, and the Deputy Governor. It was exactly as he
had imagined it would be. The MOST IMMEDIATES and the TOP SECRETS had
made a superficial impact and he was promised full co-operation in every
aspect of his assignment, but the whole business was clearly put down as
a ridiculous flap and something that must not be allowed to interfere
with the normal routine of running a small, sleepy colony, nor with the
comfort and happiness of the tourists. Roddick, the Deputy Governor, a
careful, middle-of-the-way man with a ginger moustache and gleaming
pince-nez, had put the whole affair in a most sensible light. ‘You see,
Commander Bond, in our opinion—and we have most carefully debated all
the possibilities, all the, er, angles, as our American friends would
say—it is inconceivable that a large four-engined plane could have been
hidden anywhere within the confines of the Colony. The only airstrip
capable of taking such a plane—am I right, Harling?—is here in Nassau.
So far as a landing on the sea is concerned, a, er, ditching I think
they call it, we have been in radio contact with the Administrators on
all the larger outer islands and the replies are all negative. The radar
people at the meteorological station . . .’

Bond had interrupted at this point. ‘Might I ask if the radar screen is
manned round the clock? My impression is that the airport is very busy
during the day, but that there is very little traffic at night. Would it
be possible that the radar is not so closely watched at night?’

The Commissioner of Police, a pleasant, very military looking man in his
forties, the silver buttons and insignia on whose dark blue uniform
glittered as they only can when spit and polish is a main activity and
there are plenty of batmen around, said judiciously, ‘I think the
Commander has a point there, sir. The Airport commandant admits that
things do slacken off a bit when there’s nothing scheduled. He hasn’t
got all that amount of staff and of course most of them are locals, sir.
Good men, but hardly up to London Airport standards. And the radar at
the met. station is only a GCA set with a low horizon and range—mostly
used for shipping.’

‘Quite, quite.’ The Deputy Governor didn’t want to be dragged into a
discussion about radar sets or the merits of Nassavian labour. ‘There’s
certainly a point there. No doubt Commander Bond will be making his own
inquiries. Now there was a request from the Secretary of State,’ the
title rolled sonorously forth, ‘for details and comments on recent
arrivals in the island, suspicious characters, and so forth. Mr Pitman?’

The Chief of Immigration and Customs was a sleek Nassavian with quick
brown eyes and an ingratiating manner. He smiled pleasantly. ‘Nothing
out of the ordinary, sir. The usual mixture of tourists and businessmen
and local people coming home. We were asked to have details for the past
two weeks, sir.’ He touched the briefcase on his lap. ‘I have all the
immigration forms here, sir. Perhaps Commander Bond would care to go
through them with me.’ The brown eyes flicked towards Bond and away.
‘All the big hotels have house detectives. I could probably get him
further details on any particular name. All passports were checked in
the normal manner. There were no irregularities and none of these people
was on our Wanted List.’

Bond said, ‘Might I ask a question?’

The Deputy Governor nodded enthusiastically. ‘Of course. Of course.
Anything you like. We’re all here to help.’

‘I’m looking for a group of men. Probably ten or more. They probably
stick together a good deal. Might be as many as twenty or thirty. I
guess they would be Europeans. They probably have a ship or a plane.
They may have been here for months or only a few days. I gather you have
plenty of conventions coming to Nassau—salesmen, tourist associations,
religious groups, heaven knows what all. Apparently they take a block of
rooms in some hotel and hold meetings and so forth for a week or so. Is
there anything like that going on at the moment?’

‘Mr Pitman?’

‘Well, of course we do have plenty of those sort of gatherings. Very
welcome to the Tourist Board.’ The Chief of Immigration smiled
conspiratorially at Bond as if he had just given away a closely guarded
secret. ‘But in the last two weeks we’ve only had a Moral Rearmament
Group at the Emerald Wave and the Tiptop Biscuit people at the Royal
Bahamian. They’ve gone now. Quite the usual convention pattern. All very
respectable.’

‘That’s just it, Mr Pitman. The people I’m looking for, the people who
may have arranged to steal this plane, will certainly take pains to look
respectable and behave in a respectable fashion. We’re not looking for a
bunch of flashy crooks. We think these must be very big people indeed.
Now, is there anything like that on the island, a group of people like
that?’

‘Well,’ the Chief of Immigration smiled broadly, ‘of course we’ve got
our annual treasure hunt going on.’

The Deputy Governor barked a quick, deprecating laugh. ‘Now steady on,
Mr Pitman. Surely we don’t want them to get mixed up in all this, or
heaven knows where we shall end. I can’t believe Commander Bond wants to
bother his head over a lot of rich beachcombers.’

The Commissioner of Police said doubtfully, ‘The only thing is,
sir—they do have a yacht, and a small plane for the matter of that. And
I did hear that a lot of shareholders in the swindle had come in lately.
Those points do tally with what the Commander was asking about. I admit
it’s ridiculous, but this man Largo’s respectable enough for Commander
Bond’s requirements and his men have never once given us trouble.
Unusual to have not even one case of drunkenness in a ship’s crew in
nearly six months.’

And Bond had leapt at the flimsy thread and had pursued it for another
two hours—in the Customs building and in the Commissioner’s
office—and, as a result, he had gone walking in the town to see if he
could get a look at Largo or any of his party or pick up any other
shreds of gossip. As a result he had got a good look at Domino Vitali.

And now?

The taxi had arrived at the airport. Bond told the driver to wait and
walked into the long low entrance hall just as the arrival of Larkin’s
flight was being announced over the Tannoy. He knew there would be the
usual delay for customs and immigration. He went to the souvenir shop
and bought a copy of the _New York Times_. In its usual discreet
headlines it was still leading with the loss of the Vindicator. Perhaps
it knew also about the loss of the atom bombs, because Arthur Krock, on
the leader page, had a heavyweight column about the security aspects of
the NATO alliance. Bond was half-way through this when a quiet voice in
his ear said, ‘007? Meet No 000.’

Bond swung round. It was! It was Felix Leiter!

Leiter, his CIA companion on some of the most thrilling cases in Bond’s
career, grinned and thrust the steel hook that was his right hand under
Bond’s arm. ‘Take it easy, friend. Dick Tracy will tell all when we get
out of here. Bags are out front. Let’s go.’

Bond said, ‘Well God damn it! You old so-and-so! Did you know it was
going to be me?’

‘Sure. CIA knows all.’

At the entrance Leiter had his luggage, which was considerable, put
aboard Bond’s taxi, and told the driver to take it to the Royal
Bahamian. A man standing beside an undistinguished-looking black Ford
Consul saloon left the car and came up. ‘Mr Larkin? I’m from the Hertz
company. This is the car you ordered. We hope she’s what you want. You
did specify something conventional.’

Leiter glanced casually at the car. ‘Looks all right. I just want a car
that’ll go. None of those ritzy jobs with only room for a small blonde
with a sponge bag. I’m here to do property work—not jazz it up.’

‘May I see your New York licence, sir? Right. Then if you’ll just sign
here . . . and I’ll make a note of the number of your Diner’s Club card.
When you go, leave the car anywhere you like and just notify us. We’ll
collect it. Have a good holiday, sir.’

They got into the car. Bond took the wheel. Leiter said that he’d have
to practise a bit on what he called ‘this Limey southpaw routine’ of
driving on the left, and anyway he’d be interested to see if Bond had
improved his cornering since their last drive together.

When they were out of the airport Bond said, ‘Now go ahead and tell.
Last time we met you were with Pinkertons. What’s the score?’

‘Drafted. Just damned well drafted. Hell, anyone would think there was a
war on. You see, James, once you’ve worked for CIA, you’re automatically
put on the reserve of officers when you leave. Unless you’ve been
cashiered for not eating the code-book under fire or something. And
apparently my old Chief, Allen Dulles that is, just didn’t have the men
to go round when the President sounded the fire alarm. So I and twenty
or so other guys were just pulled in—drop everything, twenty-four hours
to report. Hell! I thought the Russians had landed! And then they tell
me the score and to pack my bathing trunks and my spade and bucket and
come on down to Nassau. So of course I griped like hell. Asked them if I
shouldn’t brush up on my Canasta game and take some quick lessons in the
Cha-cha. So then they unbuttoned and told me I was to team up with you
down here and I thought maybe if that old bastard of yours, N or M or
whatever you call him, had sent you down here with your old equalizer,
there might be something cooking in the pot after all. So I picked up
the gear you’d asked for from Admin., packed the bow and arrows instead
of the spade and bucket, and here I am. And that’s that. Now you tell,
you old sonofabitch. Hell, it’s good to see you.’

Bond took Leiter through the whole story, point by point from the moment
he had been summoned to M’s office the morning before. When he came to
the shooting outside his headquarters, Leiter stopped him.

‘Now what do you make of that, James? In my Book, that’s a pretty funny
coincidence. Have you been fooling around with anybody’s wife lately?
Sounds more like around The Loop in Chicago than a mile or so from
Piccadilly.’

Bond said seriously, ‘It makes no sense to me, and none to anyone else.
The only man who might have had it in for me, recently that is, is a
crazy bastard I met down at a sort of clinic place I had to go on some
blasted medical grounds.’ Bond, to Leiter’s keen pleasure, rather
sheepishly gave details of his ‘cure’ at Shrublands. ‘I bowled this man
out as a member of a Chinese Tong, one of their secret societies, the
Red Lightning Tong. He must have heard me getting the gen on his outfit
from Records—on an open line from a call box in the place. Next thing,
he damned near managed to murder me. Just for a lark, and to get even, I
did my best to roast him alive.’ Bond gave the details. ‘Nice quiet
place, Shrublands. You’d be surprised how carrot juice seems to affect
people.’

‘Where was this lunatic asylum?’

‘Place called Washington. Modest little place compared with yours. Not
far from Brighton.’

‘And the letter was posted from Brighton.’

‘That’s the hell of a long shot.’

‘I’ll try another. One of the points our chaps brought up was that if a
plane was to be stolen at night and landed at night, a full moon would
be the hell of an aid to the job. But the plane was taken five days
after the full. Just supposing your roast chicken was the letter-sender.
And supposing the roasting forced him to delay sending the letter while
he recovered. His employers would be pretty angry. Yes?’

‘I suppose so.’

‘And supposing they gave orders for him to be rubbed for inefficiency.
And supposing the killer got to him just as he got to you to settle his
private account. From what you tell me he wouldn’t have lain down under
what you did to him. Well, now. Just supposing all that. It adds up,
doesn’t it?’

Bond laughed, partly in admiration. ‘You’ve been taking mescalin or
something. It’s a damned good sequence for a comic strip, but these
things don’t happen in real life.’

‘Planes with atom bombs don’t get stolen in real life. Except that they
do. You’re slowing down, James. How many people would believe the files
on some of the cases you and I have got mixed up in? Don’t give me that
crap about real life. There ain’t no such animal.’

Bond said seriously, ‘Well, look here, Felix. Tell you what I’ll do.
There’s just enough sense in your story, so I’ll put it on the machine
to M tonight and see if the Yard can get anywhere with it. They could
check with the clinic and the hospital in Brighton, if that’s where he
was taken, and they may be able to get on from there. Trouble is,
wherever they get, there’s nothing left of the man but his shoes, and I
doubt if they’ll catch up with the man on the motor-bike. It looked a
real pro job to me.’

‘Why not? These hi-jackers sound like pros. It’s a pro plan. It all fits
all right. You go ahead and put it on the wire and don’t be ashamed of
saying it was my idea. My medal collection has got to looking a bit thin
since I left the outfit.’

They pulled up under the portico of the Royal Bahamian and Bond gave the
keys to the parking attendant. Leiter checked in and they went up to his
room and sent for two double dry Martinis on the rocks and the menu.

From the pretentious dishes, ‘For Your Particular Consideration’,
printed in Ornamental Gothic, Bond chose Native Seafood Cocktail Supreme
followed by Disjointed Home Farm Chicken, Sauté au Cresson, which was
described in italics as ‘Tender Farm Chicken, Broiled to a Rich Brown,
Basted with Creamery Butter and Disjointed for Your Convenience. Price
38/6 or dollars 5.35.’ Felix Leiter went for the Baltic Herring in Sour
Cream followed by ‘Chopped Tenderloin of Beef, French Onion Rings (Our
Renowned Beef is Chef Selected from the Finest Corn-fed, Mid-Western
Cattle, and Aged to Perfection to Assure you of the Very Best). Price
40/3 or dollars 5.65.’

When they both had commented sourly and at length about the inflated
bogosity of tourist hotel food and particularly the mendacious misuse of
the English language to describe materials which had certainly been in
various deep-freezes for at least six months, they settled down on the
balcony to discuss Bond’s findings of the morning.

Half an hour and one more double dry Martini later, their luncheon came.
The whole thing amounted to about five shillings’ worth of badly cooked
rubbish. They ate in a mood of absentminded irritation, saying nothing.
Finally Leiter threw down his knife and fork. ‘This is Hamburger and bad
Hamburger. The French onion rings were never in France and what’s more,’
he poked at the remains with a fork, ‘they’re not even rings. They’re
oval.’ He looked belligerently across at Bond. ‘All right, Hawkshaw.
Where do we go from here?’

‘The major decision is to eat out in future. The next is to pay a visit
to the _Disco_—now.’ Bond got up from the table. ‘When we’ve done that,
we’ll have to decide whether or not these people are hunting pieces of
eight or £100,000,000. Then we’ll have to report progress.’ Bond waved
at the packing cases in a corner of the room. ‘I’ve got the loan of a
couple of rooms on the top floor of police headquarters here. The
Commissioner’s cooperative and a solid character. These Colonial Police
are good, and this one’s a cut above the rest. We can set up the radio
there and make contact this evening. Tonight there’s this party at the
Casino. We’ll go to that and see if any of these faces mean anything to
either of us. The first thing’s to see if the yacht’s clean or not. Can
you break that Geiger counter out?’

‘Sure. And it’s a honey.’ Leiter went to the cases, selected one, and
opened it. He came back carrying what looked like a Rolleiflex camera in
a portable leather case. ‘Here, give me a hand.’ Leiter took off his
wrist-watch and strapped on what appeared to be another watch. He slung
the ‘camera’ by its strap over his left shoulder. ‘Now run those wires
from the watch up my sleeve and down inside my coat. Right. Now these
two small plugs go through these holes in my coat pocket and into the
two holes in the box. Got it? Now we’re all fixed.’ Leiter stood back
and posed. ‘Man with a camera and a wrist-watch.’ He unbuttoned the flap
of the camera. ‘See? Perfectly good lenses and all that. Even a button
to press in case you have to seem to take a picture. But in back of the
make-believe there’s a metal valve, a circuit, and batteries. Now take a
look at this watch. And it is a watch.’ He held it under Bond’s eyes.
‘Only difference is that it’s a very small watch mechanism and that
sweep second-hand is a meter that takes the radioactive count. Those
wires up the sleeve hitch it on to the machine. Now then. You’re still
wearing that old wrist-watch of yours with the big phosphorous numerals.
So I walk round the room for a moment to get the background count.
That’s basic. All sorts of things give off radiation of some sort. And I
take an occasional glance at my watch—nervous type, and I’ve got an
appointment coming up. Now here, by the bathroom, all that metal is
giving off something and my watch is registering positive, but very
little. Nothing else in the room and I’ve established the amount of
background interference I’ll have to discount when I start to get hot.
Right? Now I come close up to you and my camera’s only a few inches away
from your hand. Here, take a look. Put your watch right up against the
counter. See! The sweephand is getting all excited. Move your watch away
and it loses interest. It’s those phosphorous numerals of yours.
Remember the other day one of the watch companies withdrew an
air-pilot’s watch from the market because the Atomic Energy people got
fussy? Same thing. They thought this particular pilots’ watch, with the
big phosphorescent numerals, was giving off too much radiation to be
good for the wearer. Of course,’ Leiter patted the camera case, ‘this is
a special job. Most types give off a clicking sound and if you’re
prospecting for uranium, which is the big market for these machines, you
wear earphones to try and pick up the stuff underground. For this job we
don’t need anything so sensitive. If we get near where those bombs are
hidden, this damned sweephand’ll go right off the dial. Okay? So let’s
go hire ourselves a sixpenny sick and pay a call on the ocean
greyhound.’




                                   13


                      ‘_My Name is Emilio Largo_’

Leiter’s ‘SIXPENNY SICK’ was the hotel launch, a smart Chrysler-engined
speedboat that said it would be 20 dollars an hour. They ran out
westwards from the harbour, past Silver Cay, Long Cay and Balmoral
Island, and round Delaporte Point. Five miles further down the coast,
encrusted with glittering seashore properties the boatman said cost £400
per foot of beach frontage, they rounded Old Fort Point and came upon
the gleaming white and dark blue ship lying with two anchors out in deep
water just outside the reef. Leiter whistled. He said in an awestruck
voice, ‘Boy, is that a piece of boat! I’d sure like to have one of those
to play with in my bath.’

Bond said, ‘She’s Italian. Built by a firm called Rodrigues at Messina.
Thing called an _Aliscafos_. She’s got a hydrofoil under the hull and
when she gets going you let this sort of skid down and she rises up and
practically flies. Only the screws and a few feet of the stern stay in
the water. The Police Commissioner says she can do 50 knots in calm
water. Only good for inshore work of course, but they can carry upwards
of a hundred passengers when they’re designed as fast ferries.
Apparently this one’s been designed for about forty. The rest of the
space is taken up with the owner’s quarters and cargo space. Must have
cost damned near a quarter of a million.’

The boatman broke in, ‘They say on Bay Street that she goin’ go after
the treasure these next few days or so. All the people that own a share
in the gold come in a few days ago. Then she spen’ one whole night doin’
a final recce. They say is down Exhuma way, or over by Watlings Island.
Guess you folks know that’s where Columbus make him first landfall on
this side of the Atlantic. Around fourteen ninety somethin’. But could
be anywhere down there. They’s always been talk of treasure down ’mongst
the Ragged Islands—even as far as Crooked Island. Fact is she sail out
southward. Hear her myself, right until her engines died away. East by
south-east I’da say.’ The boatman spat discreetly over the side. ‘Must
be plenty heap of treasure with the cost of that ship and all the money
they throwing ’way. Every time she go to hoiling wharf they say the
bill’s five hundred pound.’

Bond said casually, ‘Which night was it they did the final recce?’

‘Night after she hoiled. That’d be two nights ago. Sail round six.’

The blank portholes of the ship watched them approach. A sailor
polishing brass round the curve of the enclosed dome that was the bridge
walked through the hatch into the bridge and Bond could see him talking
into a mouthpiece. A tall man in white ducks and a very wide mesh
singlet appeared on deck and observed them through binoculars. He called
something to the sailor, who came and stood at the top of the ladder
down the starboard side. When their launch came alongside, the man
cupped his hands and called down, ‘What is your business please? Have
you an appointment?’

Bond called back, ‘It’s Mr Bond, Mr James Bond. From New York. I have my
attorney here. I have an inquiry to make about Palmyra, Mr Largo’s
property.’

‘One moment please.’ The sailor disappeared and returned accompanied by
the man in white ducks and singlet. Bond recognized him from the police
description. He called down cheerfully, ‘Come aboard, come aboard.’ He
gestured for the sailor to go down and help fend the launch. Bond and
Leiter climbed out of the launch and went up the ladder.

Largo held out a hand. ‘My name is Emilio Largo. Mr Bond? And . . . ?’

‘Mr Larkin, my attorney from New York. Actually I’m English, but I have
property in America.’ They shook hands. ‘I’m sorry to bother you, Mr
Largo, but it’s about Palmyra, the property I believe you rent from Mr
Bryce.’

‘Ah yes, of course.’ The beautiful teeth gleamed warmth and welcome.
‘Come on down to the stateroom, gentlemen. I’m sorry I am not properly
dressed to receive you.’ The big brown hands caressed his flanks, the
wide mouth turned down in deprecation. ‘My visitors usually announce
themselves on the ship-to-shore. But if you will forgive the informality
. . .’ Largo allowed the phrase to die on the air and ushered them
through a low hatch and down a few aluminium steps into the main cabin.
The rubber-lined hatch hissed to behind him.

It was a fine large cabin panelled in mahogany with deep wine-red carpet
and comfortable dark blue leather club chairs. The sun shining through
the slats of venetian blinds over the broad square ports added a touch
of gay light to an otherwise rather sombre and masculine room, its long
centre table littered with papers and charts, glass-fronted cabinets
containing fishing gear and an array of guns and other weapons, and a
black rubber underwater diving suit and aqualung suspended, almost like
the skeleton in a sorcerer’s den, from a rack in one corner. The
air-conditioning made the cabin deliciously cool, and Bond felt his damp
shirt slowly freeing itself from his skin.

‘Please take a chair, gentlemen.’ Largo carelessly brushed aside the
charts and papers on the table as if they were of no importance.
‘Cigarettes?’ He placed a large silver box between them. ‘And now what
can I get you to drink?’ He went to the loaded sideboard. ‘Something
cool and not too strong perhaps? A Planter’s Punch? Gin and tonic. Or
there are various beers. You must have had a hot journey in that open
launch. I would have sent my boat for you if only I had known.’

They both asked for a plain tonic. Bond said, ‘I’m very sorry to barge
in like this, Mr Largo. No idea I could have got you on the telephone.
We just got in this morning and as I’ve only a few days I have to get a
move on. The point is, I’m looking for a property down here.’

‘Oh yes?’ Largo brought the glasses and bottles of tonic to the table
and sat down so that they formed a comfortable group. ‘What a good idea.
Wonderful place. I’ve been here for six months and already I’d like to
stay for ever. But the prices they’re asking—’ Largo threw up his
hands. ‘These Bay Street pirates. And the millionaires, they are even
worse. But you are wise to come at the end of the season. Perhaps some
of the owners are disappointed not to have sold. Perhaps they will not
open their mouths so wide.’

‘That’s what I thought.’ Bond sat comfortably back and lit a cigarette.
‘Or rather what my lawyer, Mr Larkin, advised.’ Leiter shook his head
pessimistically. ‘He had made some inquiries and he frankly advised that
real estate values down here have gone mad.’ Bond turned politely
towards Leiter to bring him into the conversation. ‘Isn’t that so?’

‘Daft, Mr Largo, quite daft. Worse even than Florida. Out of this world.
I wouldn’t advise any client of mine to invest at these prices.’

‘Quite so.’ Largo obviously didn’t want to get drawn too deeply into
these matters. ‘You mentioned something about Palmyra. Is there anything
I can do to help in that respect?’

Bond said, ‘I understand you have a lease of the property, Mr Largo. And
there is talk that you may be leaving the house before long. Only gossip
of course. You know what they are in these small islands. But it sounds
more or less what I’m looking for and I gather the owner, this
Englishman, Bryce, might sell if he got the right price. What I was
going to ask you,’ Bond looked apologetic, ‘was whether we might drive
out and look the place over. Some time when you weren’t there of course.
Any time that might suit you.’

Largo flashed his teeth warmly. He spread his hands. ‘But of course, of
course, my dear fellow. Whenever you wish. There is no one in residence
but my niece and a few servants. And she is out most of the time. Please
just call her up on the telephone. I shall tell her that you will be
doing so. It is indeed a charming property—so imaginative. A beautiful
piece of design. If only all rich men had such good taste.’

Bond got to his feet and Leiter followed suit. ‘Well that’s
extraordinarily kind of you, Mr Largo. And now we’ll leave you in peace.
Perhaps we may meet again in the town some time. You must come and have
lunch. But,’ Bond poured admiration and flattery into his voice, ‘with a
yacht like this, I don’t suppose you ever want to come ashore. Must be
the only one on this side of the Atlantic. Didn’t one used to run
between Venice and Trieste? I seem to remember reading about it
somewhere.’

Largo grinned his pleasure. ‘Yes, that is right, quite right. They are
also on the Italian lakes. For passenger traffic. Now they are buying
them in South America. A wonderful design for coastal waters. She only
draws four feet when the hydrofoil is operating.’

‘I suppose accommodation’s the problem?’

It is a weakness of all men, though not necessarily of all women, to
love their material possessions. Largo said, with a trace of pricked
vanity, ‘No, no. I think you will find that is not so. You can spare
five minutes? We are rather crowded at the moment. You have heard no
doubt of our treasure hunt?’ He looked sharply at them as a man would
who expects ridicule. ‘But we will not discuss that now. No doubt you do
not believe in these things. But my associates in the affair are all on
board. With the crew, there are forty of us. You will see that we are
not cramped. You would like?’ Largo gestured to the door in the rear of
the stateroom.

Felix Leiter showed reluctance. ‘You know, Mr Bond, that we have that
meeting with Mr Harold Christie at five o’clock?’

Bond waved the objection aside. ‘Mr Christie is a charming man. I know
he won’t mind if we are a few minutes late. I’d love to see over the
ship if you’re sure you can spare the time, Mr Largo.’

Largo said, ‘Come. It will not take more than a few minutes. The
excellent Mr Christie is a friend of mine. He will understand.’ He went
to the door and held it open.

Bond had been expecting the politeness. It would interfere with Leiter
and his apparatus. He said firmly, ‘Please go first, Mr Largo. You will
be able to tell us when to duck our heads.’

With more affabilities, Largo led the way.

Ships, however modern, are more or less the same—the corridors to port
and starboard of the engine room, rows of cabin doors, which Largo
explained were occupied, the large communal bathrooms, the galley, where
two cheerful looking Italians in white smocks laughed at Largo’s jokes
about the food and seemed pleased with the visitors’ interest, the huge
engine room where the chief engineer and his mate, Germans it seemed,
gave enthusiastic information about the powerful twin diesels and
explained the hydraulics of the hydrofoil depressor—it was all exactly
like visiting any other ship and saying the right things to the crew,
using the right superlatives to the owner.

The short space of afterdeck was occupied by the little two-seater
amphibian, painted dark blue and white to match the yacht, its wings now
folded and its engine cowled against the sun, a big jolly-boat to hold
about twenty men, and an electric derrick to hoist them in- and
outboard. Bond, estimating the ship’s displacement and her free-board,
said casually, ‘And the hold? More cabin space?’

‘Just storage. And the fuel tanks of course. She is an expensive ship to
run. We have to carry several tons. The ballast problem is important
with these ships. When her bows come up, the fuel shifts aft. We have to
have big lateral tanks to correct these things.’ Talking fluently and
expertly Largo led them back up the starboard passageway. They were
about to pass the radio room when Bond said. ‘You said you had
ship-to-shore. What else do you carry? The usual Marconi short and long
wave, I suppose. Could I have a look? Radio has always fascinated me.’

Largo said politely, ‘Some other time, if you don’t mind. I’m keeping
the operator full time on met. reports. They’re rather important to us
at the moment.’

‘Of course.’

They climbed up into the enclosed dome of the bridge, where Largo
briefly explained the controls and then led them out on to the narrow
deck space. ‘So there you are,’ said Largo. ‘The good ship _Disco
Volante_—the Flying Saucer. And she really does fly, I can assure you.
I hope you and Mr Larkin will come for a short cruise one of these days.
For the present,’ he smiled with the hint of a secret shared, ‘as you
may have heard, we are rather busy.’

‘Very exciting, this treasure business. Do you think you’ve got a good
chance?’

‘We like to think so.’ Largo was deprecating. ‘I only wish I could tell
you more,’ he waved an apologetic hand. ‘Unfortunately, as they say, my
lips are sealed. I hope you will understand.’

‘Yes, of course. You have your shareholders to consider. I only wish I
was one so that I could come along. I suppose there’s not room for
another investor?’

‘Alas no. The issue, as they say, is fully subscribed. It would have
been very pleasant to have had you with us.’ Largo held out a hand.
‘Well, I see that Mr Larkin has been looking anxiously at his watch
during our brief tour. We must not keep Mr Christie waiting any longer.
It has been a great pleasure to meet you, Mr Bond. And you, Mr Larkin.’

With a further exchange of courtesies they went down the ladder to the
waiting launch and got under way. There was a last wave from Mr Largo
before he vanished through the hatch to the bridge.

They sat in the stern well away from the boatman. Leiter shook his head.
‘Absolutely negative. Reaction around the engine room and the radio
room, but that’s normal. It was all normal, damnably normal. What did
you make of him and the whole set-up?’

‘Same as you—damned normal. He looks what he says he is, and behaves
that way. Not much crew about, but the ones we saw were either ordinary
crew or wonderful actors. Only two small things struck me. There was no
way down to the hold that I could see, but of course it could have been
a manhole under the passage carpet. But then how do you get the stores
he talked of down there? And there’s the hell of a lot of space in that
hold even if I don’t know much about naval architecture. I’ll do a check
with the oiling wharf through the customs people and see just how much
fuel he does carry. Then it’s odd that we didn’t see any of these
shareholders. It was around three o’clock when we went on board and most
of them may have been having siestas. But surely not all nineteen of
them. What do they do in their cabins all the time? Another small thing.
Did you notice that Largo didn’t smoke and that there was no trace of
tobacco smell anywhere in the ship? That’s odd. Around forty men and not
one of them is a smoker. If one had anything else to go on one would say
that wasn’t coincidence but discipline. The real pros don’t drink or
smoke. But I admit it’s a damned long shot. Notice the Decca Navigator
and the echo-sounder? Pretty expensive bits of equipment both of them.
Fairly normal on a big yacht of course, but I’d have expected Largo to
point them out when he was showing us the bridge. Rich men are proud of
their toys. But that’s only clutching at straws. I’d have said the whole
outfit’s as clean as a whistle if it wasn’t for all that missing space,
we weren’t shown. That talk about fuel and ballast sounded a bit glib to
me. What do you think?’

‘Same as you. There’s at least half of that ship we didn’t see. But then
again there’s a perfectly good answer to that. He may have got a stack
of secret treasure-hunting gear down there he doesn’t want anyone to
see. Remember that merchant ship off Gibraltar during the war? The
Italian frogmen used it as a base. Big sort of trap door affair cut in
the hull below the waterline. I suppose he hasn’t got something like
that?’

Bond looked sharply at Leiter. ‘The _Olterra_. One of the blackest marks
against Intelligence during the whole war.’ He paused. ‘The _Disco_ was
anchored in about forty feet of water. Supposing they’d got the bombs
buried in the sand below her. Would your Geiger counter have
registered?’

‘Doubt it. I’ve got an underwater model and we could go and have a sniff
round when it gets dark. But really, James,’ Leiter frowned impatiently,
‘aren’t we getting a bit off beam—seeing burglars under the bed? We’ve
got damn-all to go on. Largo’s a powerful-looking piratical sort of
chap, probably a bit of a crook where women are concerned. But what the
hell have we got against him? Have you put a Trace through on him and on
these shareholders and the crew members?’

‘Yes. Put them all on the wire from Government House, Urgent Rates. We
should get an answer by this evening. But look here, Felix,’ Bond’s
voice was stubborn, ‘there’s a damned fast ship with a plane and forty
men no one knows anything about. There’s not another group or even an
individual in the area who looks in the least promising. All right, so
the outfit looks all right and its story seems to stand up. But just
supposing the whole thing was a phoney—a damned good one of course, but
then so it ought to be with all that’s at stake. Take another look at
the picture. These so-called shareholders all arrive just in time for 3
June. On that night the _Disco_ goes to sea and stays out till morning.
Just supposing she rendezvous’d that plane in shallow water somewhere.
Just suppose she picked up the bombs and put them away—in the sand
under the ship, if you like. Anyway, somewhere safe and convenient. Just
suppose all that and what sort of a picture do you get?’

‘A B picture so far as I’m concerned, James.’ Leiter shrugged
resignedly. ‘But I guess there’s just enough to make it a lead.’ He
laughed sardonically. ‘But I’d rather shoot myself than put it in
tonight’s report. If we’re going to make fools of ourselves, we’d better
do it well out of sight and sound of our chiefs. So what’s on your mind?
What comes next?’

‘While you get our communications going, I’m going to check with the
oiling wharf. Then we’ll call up this Domino girl and try and get
ourselves asked for a drink and have a quick look at Largo’s shore
base—this Palmyra. Then we go to the casino and look over the whole of
Largo’s group. And then,’ Bond looked stubbornly at Leiter, ‘I’m going
to borrow a good man from the Police Commissioner to give me a hand, put
on an aqualung and go out and have a sniff round the _Disco_ with your
other Geiger machine.’

Leiter said laconically, ‘Destry Rides Again! Well, I’ll go along with
that, James. Just for old times’ sake. But don’t go and stub your toe on
a sea-urchin or anything. I see there are free Cha-cha lessons in the
ballroom of the Royal Bahamian tomorrow. We’ve got to keep fit for
those. I guess there’ll be nothing else in this trip for my memory
book.’

Back in the hotel, a dispatch rider from Government House was waiting
for Bond. He saluted smartly, handed over an OHMS envelope and got
Bond’s signed receipt in exchange. It was a cable from the Colonial
Office ‘Personal to the Governor.’ The text was prefixed PROBOND. The
cable read: ‘YOUR 1107 RECORDS HAVE NOTHING REPEAT NOTHING ON THESE
NAMES STOP INFORMATIVELY ALL STATIONS REPORT NEGATIVELY ON OPERATION
THUNDERBALL STOP WHAT HAVE YOU QUERY. The message was signed ‘PRISM’
which meant that M had approved it.

Bond handed the cable to Leiter.

Leiter read it. He said, ‘See what I mean? We’re on a bum steer. This is
a thumb-twiddler. See you later in the Pineapple Bar for a dry Martini
that’s half a jumbo olive. I’ll go send a post-card to Washington and
ask them to send down a couple of WAVES. We’re going to have time on our
hands.’




                                   14


                            _Sour Martinis_

As it turned out, the first half of Bond’s programme for the evening
went by the board. On the telephone, Domino Vitali said that it would
not be convenient for them to see the house that evening. Her guardian
and some of his friends were coming ashore. Yes it was indeed possible
that they might meet at the Casino that evening. She would be dining on
board and the _Disco_ would then sail round and anchor off the Casino.
But how would she be able to recognize him in the Casino? She had a very
poor memory for faces. Would he perhaps wear a flower in his buttonhole
or something?

Bond had laughed. He said that would be all right. He would remember her
by her beautiful blue eyes. They were unforgettable. And the blue rinse
that matched them. He had put the receiver down half-way through the
amused, sexy chuckle. He suddenly wanted to see her again very much.

But the movement of the ship altered his plans for the better. It would
be much easier to reconnoitre her in the harbour. It would be a shorter
swim and he would be able to go into the water under cover of the
harbour police wharf. Equally, with her anchorage empty, it would be all
the easier to survey the area where she had been lying. But if Largo
moved the yacht about so nonchalantly was it likely the bombs, if there
were any, would be hidden at the anchorage? If they were, surely the
_Disco_ would stand watch over them. Bond decided to put a decision
aside until he had more, and more expert, information about the ship’s
hull.

He sat in his room and wrote his negative report to M. He read it
through. It would be a depressing signal to get. Should he say anything
about the wisp of a lead he was working on? No. Not until he had
something solid. Wishful intelligence, the desire to please or reassure
the recipient, was the most dangerous commodity in the whole realm of
secret information. Bond could imagine the reaction in Whitehall where
the _Thunderball_ war-room would be ready, anxious to grasp at straws.
M’s careful ‘I think we may conceivably have got a lead in the Bahamas.
Absolutely nothing definite, but this particular man doesn’t often go
wrong on these things. Yes, certainly I’ll check back and see if we can
get a follow-up.’ And the buzz would get around: ‘M’s on to something.
Agent of his thinks he’s got a lead. The Bahamas. Yes, I think we’d
better tell the P M.’ Bond shuddered. The MOST IMMEDIATES would pour in
to him: ‘Elucidate your 1806.’ ‘Flash fullest details.’ ‘Premier wants
detailed grounds for your 1806.’ There would be no end to the flood.
Leiter would get the same from CIA. The whole place would be in an
uproar. Then, in answer to Bond’s tatty little fragments of gossip and
speculation, there would come the blistering: ‘Surprised you should take
this flimsy evidence seriously. Futurely confine your signals to facts,’
and, the final degradation, ‘View speculative nature your 1806 and
subsequents comma future signals must repeat must be joint and
countersigned by CIA representative.’

Bond wiped his forehead. He unlocked the case containing his cipher
machine, transposed his text, checked it again and went off to Police
Headquarters where Leiter was sitting at his keyboard, the sweat of
concentration pouring down his neck. Ten minutes later Leiter took off
his earphones and handed over to Bond. He mopped his face with an
already drenched handkerchief. ‘First it’s sunspots and I had to swap
over to the emergency wavelength. There I found they’d put a baboon on
the other end—you know, one of the ones that can write the whole of
Shakespeare if you leave him at it long enough.’ He angrily waved
several pages of cipher groups. ‘Now I’ve got to unscramble all this.
Probably from Accounts about how much extra income tax this sunshine
trip will cost me.’ He sat down at a table and began cranking away at
his machine.

Bond put his short message over quickly. He could see it being punched
out on the tapes in one of those busy rooms on the eighth floor, going
to the supervisor, being marked ‘Personal for M. copy to OO Section and
Records’, then another girl hurrying off down the passage with the
flimsy yellow forms on a clip file. He queried whether there was
anything for him and signed off. He left Leiter and went down to the
Commissioner’s room.

Harling was sitting at his desk with his coat off, dictating to a police
sergeant. He dismissed him, pushed a box of cigarettes over his desk to
Bond and lit one himself. He smiled quizzically. ‘Any progress?’

Bond told him that the Trace on the Largo group had been negative and
that they had called on Largo and gone over the _Disco_ with a Geiger
counter. This also had been negative. Bond still wasn’t satisfied. He
told the Commissioner what he wanted to know about the fuel capacity of
the _Disco_ and the exact location of the fuel tanks. The Commissioner
nodded amiably and picked up the telephone. He asked for a Sergeant
Molony of the Harbour Police. He cradled the receiver and explained, ‘We
check all fuelling. This is a narrow harbour crammed with small craft,
deep-sea fishing boats and so on. Quite a fire hazard if something went
wrong. We like to know what everyone is carrying and whereabouts in the
ship. Just in case there’s some fire-fighting to be done or we want a
particular ship to get out of range in a hurry.’ He went back to the
telephone. ‘Sergeant Molony?’ He repeated Bond’s questions, listened,
said thank you, and put the receiver down. ‘She carries a maximum of 500
gallons of diesel. Took that amount in on the afternoon of 2 June. She
also carries about forty gallons of lubricating oil and a hundred
gallons of drinking water—all carried amidships just for’ard of the
engine room. That what you want?’

This made nonsense of Largo’s talk of lateral tanks and the difficult
ballast problem and so forth. Of course he could have wanted to keep
some secret treasure-hunting gear out of sight of the visitors, but at
least there _was_ something on board he wanted to hide, and, for all his
show of openness, it was now established that Mr Largo might be a rich
treasure hunter, but he was also an unreliable witness. Now Bond’s mind
was made up. It was the hull of the ship he wanted to have a look at.
Leiter’s mention of the _Olterra_ had been a long shot, but it just
might pay off.

Bond passed on a guarded version of his thoughts to the Commissioner. He
told him where the _Disco_ would be lying that night. Was there on the
force a totally reliable man who could give him a hand with his
underwater recce, and was there a sound aqualung, fully charged,
available?

Harling gently asked if this was wise. He didn’t exactly know the laws
of trespass, but these seemed to be good citizens and they were
certainly good spenders. Largo was very popular with everyone. Any kind
of scandal, particularly if the police was involved, would create the
hell of a stink in the Colony.

Bond said firmly, ‘I’m sorry. Commissioner. I quite see your point. But
these risks have to be run and I’ve got a job to do. Surely the
Secretary of State’s instructions are sufficient authority,’ Bond fired
his broadside, ‘I could get specific orders from him, or from the Prime
Minister for the matter of that, in about an hour if you feel it’s
necessary.’

The Commissioner shook his head. He smiled. ‘No need to use the big
guns, Commander. Of course you shall have what you want. I was just
giving you the local reaction. I’m sure the Governor would have given
you the same warning. This is a small puddle here. We’re not used to the
crash treatment from Whitehall. No doubt we’ll get used to it if this
flap lasts long enough. Now then. Yes, we’ve got plenty of what you
want. We’ve got twenty men in the Harbour Salvage Unit. Have to. You’d
be surprised how often a small boat gets wrecked in the fairway, just
where some cruise ship’s going to anchor. And of course there’s the
occasional body. I’ll have Constable Santos assigned to you. Splendid
chap. Native of Eleuthera, where he used to win all the swimming prizes.
He’ll have the gear you want where you want it. Now just give me the
details . . .’

Back in his hotel, Bond took a shower, swallowed a double Bourbon Old
Fashioned and threw himself down on his bed. He felt absolutely
beat—the plane trip, the heat, the nagging sense that he was making a
fool of himself in front of the Commissioner, in front of Leiter, in
front of himself, added to the dangers, and probably futile ones at
that, of this ugly night swim, had built up tensions that could only be
eased by sleep and solitude. He went out like a light—to dream of
Domino being pursued by a shark with dazzling white teeth that suddenly
became Largo, Largo who turned on him with those huge hands. They were
coming closer, they reached slowly for him, they had him by the shoulder
. . . But then the bell rang for the end of the round, and went on
ringing.

Bond reached out a drugged hand for the receiver. It was Leiter. He
wanted that Martini with the jumbo olive. It was nine o’clock. What the
hell was Bond doing? Did he want someone to help with the zip?

The Pineapple Room was panelled in bamboo carefully varnished against
termites. Wrought iron pineapples on the tables and against the wall
contained segments of thick red candle, and more light was provided by
illuminated aquaria let into the walls and by ceiling lights enclosed in
pink glass starfish. The Vinylite banquettes were in ivory white and the
barman and the two waiters wore scarlet satin calypso shirts with their
black trousers.

Bond joined Leiter at a corner table. They both wore white dinner
jackets with their dress trousers. Bond had pointed up his rich,
property-seeking status with a wine-red cummerbund. Leiter laughed. ‘I
nearly tied a gold-plated bicycle chain round my waist in case of
trouble, but I remembered just in time that I’m a peaceful lawyer. I
suppose it’s right that you should get the girls on this assignment. I
suppose I just stand by and arrange the marriage settlement and later
the alimony. Waiter!’

Leiter ordered two dry Martinis. ‘Just watch,’ he said sourly.

The Martinis arrived. Leiter took one look at them and told the waiter
to send over the barman. When the barman came, looking resentful, Leiter
said, ‘My friend, I asked for a Martini and not a soused olive.’ He
picked the olive out of the glass with the cocktail stick. The glass,
that had been three-quarters full, was now half full. Leiter said
mildly. ‘This was being done to me while the only drink you knew was
milk. I’d learned the basic economics of your business by the time you’d
graduated to Coca Cola. One bottle of Gordon’s Gin contains sixteen true
measures—double measures that is, the only ones I drink. Cut the gin
with three ounces of water and that makes it up to twenty-two. Have a
jigger glass with a big steal in the bottom and a bottle of these fat
olives and you’ve got around twenty-eight measures. Bottle of gin here
costs only two dollars retail, let’s say around a dollar sixty
wholesale. You charge eighty cents for a Martini, one dollar sixty for
two. Same price as a whole bottle of gin. And with your twenty-eight
measures to the bottle, you’ve still got twenty-six left. That’s a clear
profit on one bottle of gin of around twenty-one dollars. Give you a
dollar for the olives and the drop of vermouth and you’ve still got
twenty dollars in your pocket. Now, my friend, that’s too much profit,
and if I could be bothered to take this Martini to the management and
then to the Tourist Board, you’d be in trouble. Be a good chap and mix
us two large dry Martinis without olives and with some slices of lemon
peel separate. Okay? Right, then we’re friends again.’

The barman’s face had run through indignation, respect and then the
sullenness of guilt and fear. Reprieved, but clutching at his scraps of
professional dignity, he snapped his fingers for the waiter to take away
the glasses. ‘Okay, suh. Whatever you says. But we’ve got plenty
overheads here and the majority of customers they doan complain.’

Leiter said, ‘Well, here’s one who’s dry behind the ears. A good barman
should learn to be able to recognize the serious drinker from the
status-seeker who wants just to be seen in your fine bar.’

‘Yassuh.’ The barman moved away with Negro dignity.

Bond said, ‘You got those figures right, Felix? I always knew one got
clipped, but I thought only about a hundred per cent—not four or five.’

‘Young man, since I graduated from Government service to Pinkertons, the
scales have dropped from my eyes. The cheating that goes on in hotels
and restaurants is more sinful than all the rest of the sin in the
world. Anyone in a tuxedo before seven in the evening is a crocodile,
and if he couldn’t take a good bite at your pocketbook he’d take a good
bite at your ear. The same goes for the rest of the consumer business,
even when it’s not wearing a tuxedo. Sometimes it gets me real mad to
have to eat and drink the muck you get and then see what you’re charged
for it. Look at our damned lunch today. Six, seven bucks with fifteen
per cent added for what’s called service. And then the waiter hangs
about for another fifty cents for riding up in the elevator with the
stuff. Hell,’ Leiter ran an angry hand through his mop of straw hair,
‘just don’t let’s talk about it. I’m fit to bust a gut when I think
about it.’

The drinks came. They were excellent. Leiter calmed down and ordered a
second round. He said, ‘Now let’s get angry about something else.’ He
laughed curtly. ‘Guess I’m just sore at being back in Government Service
again watching all the taxpayers’ money going down the drain on this
wild goose chase. Mark you, James,’ there was apology in Leiter’s voice,
‘I’m not saying this whole operation isn’t a true bill, hell of a mess
in fact, but what riles me is that we should be a couple of arse-end
Charlies stuck down on this sand-pit while the other guys have got the
hot spots—you know, places where something really may be happening—or
at least likely to happen. Tell you the truth, I felt like a damned fool
gumshoeing round that feller’s yacht this afternoon with my little
Geiger toy.’ He looked keenly at Bond. ‘You don’t find you grow out of
these things? I mean it’s all right when there’s a war on. But it seems
kinda childish when peace is bustin’ out all over.’

Bond said doubtfully, ‘Of course I know what you mean, Felix. Perhaps
it’s just that in England we don’t feel quite as secure as you do in
America. The war just doesn’t seem to have ended for us—Berlin, Cyprus,
Kenya, Suez, let alone these jobs with people like SMERSH that I used to
get tangled up in. There always seems to be something boiling up
somewhere. Now this damned business. Dare say I’m taking it all too
seriously, but there’s something fishy going on around here. I checked
up on that fuel problem and Largo certainly told us a lie.’ Bond gave
the details of what he had learned at police headquarters. ‘I feel I’ve
got to make sure tonight. You realize there’s only about seventy hours
to go? If I find anything, I suggest tomorrow we take a small plane and
really run a search over as much of the area as we can. That plane’s a
big thing to hide even under water. You still got your licence?’

‘Sure, sure.’ Leiter shrugged his shoulders. ‘I’ll go along with you. Of
course I will. If we find anything, perhaps the signal I got this
evening won’t look so damned silly after all.’

So this was what had put Leiter into such a vile temper! Bond said,
‘What was that?’

Leiter took a drink and gazed morosely into his glass. ‘Well, for my
money it’s just so much more attitudinizing by those power-struck
fatcats at the Pentagon. But that sheaf of stuff I was waving about was
a circular to all our men on this job to say that the Army and the Navy
and the Air Force are holding themselves ready to give full support to
CIA if anything turns up. Think of that, dammit!’ Leiter looked angrily
at Bond. ‘Think of the waste of fuel and manpower that must be going on
all over the world keeping all these units at readiness! Just to show
you know what I’ve been allocated as my striking force?’ Leiter gave a
harsh, derisive laugh. ‘Half-squadron of Super Sabre fighter bombers
from Pensacola, and—’ Leiter stabbed Bond’s forearm with a hard finger.
‘And, my friend, the _Manta_! The—_Manta_! Our latest—atomic
submarine!’ When Bond smiled at all this vehemence, Leiter continued
more reasonably: ‘Mark you, it’s not quite so idiotic as it sounds.
These Sabres are on anti-submarine sweep duties anyway. Carrying depth
charges. They have to be at readiness. And the _Manta_ happens to be on
some sort of a training cruise in the area, getting ready to go under
the South Pole for a change I suppose, or some other damned promotion
job to help along the Navy Estimates. But I ask you! Here’s all these
million dollars’ worth of material on instant call from Ensign Leiter,
commanding Room 201 in the Royal Bahamian Hotel! Not Bad!’

Bond shrugged his shoulders. ‘Seems to me your President is taking all
this a bit more seriously than his Man in Nassau. I suppose our Chiefs
of Staff have weighed in with our staff on the other side of the
Atlantic. Anyway, no harm in having the big battalions in the offing
just in case Nassau Casino happens to be Target No 1. By the way, what
ideas have your people got about these targets? What have you got in
this part of the world that fits in with SPECTRE’s letter? We’ve only
got the joint rocket base at a place called North-West Cay at the
eastern end of the Grand Bahamas. That’s about 150 miles north of here.
Apparently the gear and prototypes we and your people have got there
would easily be worth £100,000,000.’

‘The only possible targets I’ve been given are Cape Canaveral, the naval
base at Pensacola, and if the party really is going to take place in
this area, Miami for Target No 2, with Tampa as a possible runner-up.
SPECTRE used the words “a piece of property belonging to the Western
Powers”. That sounds like some kind of installation to me—something
like the uranium mines in the Congo, for instance. But a rocket base
would fit all right. If we’ve got to take this thing seriously, I’d lay
odds on Canaveral or this place on Grand Bahama. Only thing I can’t
understand, if they’ve got these bombs, how are they going to transport
them to the target and set them off?’

‘A submarine could do it—just lay one of the bombs off-shore through a
torpedo tube. Or a sailing dinghy for the matter of that. Apparently
exploding these things is no problem so long as they recovered all the
parts from the plane. Apparently you’d just have to insert some kind of
fuse thing in the right place between the TNT and the plutonium, and
screw the impact fuse off the nose and fit a time fuse that would give
you time to get a hundred miles away.’ Bond added casually, ‘Have to
have an expert who knows the drill of course, but the trip would be no
problem for the _Disco_, for instance. She could lay the bomb off Grand
Bahama at midnight and be back at anchor off Palmyra by breakfast time.’
He smiled. ‘See what I mean? It all adds up.’

‘Nuts,’ said Leiter succinctly. ‘You’ll have to do better than that if
you want my blood pressure to go up. Anyway, let’s get the hell out of
here and go have ourselves some eggs and bacon in one of those clip
joints on Bay Street. It’ll cost us twenty dollars plus tax, but the
_Manta_ probably burns that every time her screws turn full circle. Then
we’ll go along to the Casino and see if Mr Fuchs or Signor Pontecorvo is
sitting beside Largo at the black jack table.’




                                   15


                            _Cardboard Hero_

The Nassau Casino used to be the only legal casino on British soil
anywhere in the world. How this was justified under the laws of the
Commonwealth no one can quite figure. It is leased each year to a
Canadian gambling syndicate and their operating profits in the smart
winter season are estimated to average around $100,000. The only games
played are roulette, with two zeros instead of one, which increased the
take to the house from the European 3·6 to a handsome 5·4; black jack,
or 21, on which the house makes between six and seven per cent; and one
table of chemin de fer, whose cagnotte yields a modest five per cent.
The operation is run as a club in a handsome private house on West Bay
Street and there is a pleasant dance and supper room with a three-piece
combo that plays old favourites in strict time, and a lounge bar. It is
a well run, elegant place that deserves its profit.

The Governor’s ADC had presented Bond and Leiter with membership cards,
and after they had had coffee and a stinger at the bar they separated
and went to the tables.

Largo was playing chemin de fer. He had a fat pile of hundred-dollar
plaques in front of him and half a dozen of the big yellow
thousand-dollar biscuits. Domino Vitali sat behind him chain-smoking and
watching the play. Bond observed the game from a distance. Largo was
playing expansively, bancoing whenever he could and letting his own
banks run. He was winning steadily, but with excellent manners, and by
the way people joked with him and applauded his coups he was obviously a
favourite in the Casino. Domino, in black with a square-cut neckline and
with one large diamond on a thin chain at her throat, was looking morose
and bored. The woman on Largo’s right, having bancoed him three times
and lost, got up and left the table. Bond went quickly across the room
and slid into the empty place. It was a bank of eight hundred
dollars—the round sum being due to Largo making up the cagnotte after
each play.

It is good for the banker when he has got past the third banco. It often
means the bank is going to run. Bond knew this perfectly well. He was
also painfully aware that his total capital was only 1,000 dollars. But
the fact that everyone was so nervous of Largo’s luck made him bold.
And, after all, the table has no memory. Luck, he told himself, is
strictly for the birds. He said, ‘Banco.’

‘Ah my good friend Mr Bond,’ Largo held out a hand. ‘Now we have the big
money coming to the table. Perhaps I should pass the bank. The English
know how to play at railway trains. But still,’ he smiled charmingly,
‘if I have to lose I would certainly like to lose to Mr Bond.’

The big brown hand gave the shoe a soft slap. Largo eased out the pink
tongue of playing card and moved it across the baize to Bond. He took
one for himself and then pressed out one more for each of them. Bond
picked up his first card and flicked it face up into the middle of the
table. It was a nine, the nine of diamonds. Bond glanced sideways at
Largo. He said, ‘That is always a good start—so good that I will also
face my second card.’ He casually flicked it out to join the nine. It
turned over in mid-air and fell beside the nine. It was a glorious ten,
the ten of spades. Unless Largo’s two cards also added up to nine or
nineteen, Bond had won.

Largo laughed, but the laugh had a hard edge to it. ‘You certainly make
me try,’ he said gaily. He threw his cards to follow Bond’s. They were
the eight of hearts and the king of clubs. Largo had lost by a pip—two
naturals, but one just better than the other, the cruellest way to lose.
Largo laughed hugely. ‘Somebody had to be second,’ he said to the table
at large. ‘What did I say? The English can pull what they like out of
the shoe.’

The croupier pushed the chips across to Bond. Bond made a small pile of
them. He gestured at the heap in front of Largo: ‘So, it seems, can the
Italians. I told you this afternoon we should go into partnership.’

Largo laughed delightedly. ‘Well, let’s just try once again. Put in what
you have won and I will banco it in partnership with Mr Snow on your
right. Yes, Mr Snow?’

Mr Snow, a tough-looking European who, Bond remembered, was one of the
shareholders, agreed. Bond put in the eight hundred and they each put in
four against him. Bond won again, this time with a six against a five
for the table—once more by one point.

Largo shook his head mournfully. ‘Now indeed we have seen the writing on
the wall. Mr Snow, you will have to continue alone. This Mr Bond has
green fingers against me. I surrender.’

Now Largo was smiling only with his mouth. Mr Snow suivied and pushed
forward 1,600 dollars to cover Bond’s stake. Bond thought: I have made
1,600 dollars in two coups, over five hundred pounds. And it would be
fun to pass the bank and for the bank to go down on the next hand. He
withdrew his stake and said, ‘La main passe.’ There was a buzz of
comment. Largo said dramatically, ‘Don’t do it to me! Don’t tell me the
bank’s going to go down on the next hand! If it does I shoot myself.
Okay, okay, I will buy Mr Bond’s bank and we will see.’ He threw some
plaques out on to the table—1,600 dollars’ worth.

And Bond heard his own voice say banco! He was bancoing his own
bank—telling Largo that he had done it to him once, then twice, and now
he was going to do it, inevitably again!

Largo turned round to face Bond. Smiling with his mouth, he narrowed his
eyes and looked carefully, with a new curiosity, at Bond’s face. He said
quietly, ‘But you are hunting me, my dear fellow. You are pursuing me.
What is this? Vendetta?’

Bond thought, I will see if an association of words does something to
him. He said, ‘When I came to the table I saw a spectre.’ He said the
word casually, with no hint at double meaning.

The smile came off Largo’s face as if he had been slapped. It was at
once switched on again, but now the whole face was tense, strained, and
the eyes had gone watchful and very hard. His tongue came out and
touched his lips. ‘Really? What do you mean?’

Bond said lightly, ‘The spectre of defeat. I thought your luck was on
the turn. Perhaps I was wrong.’ He gestured at the shoe. ‘Let’s see.’

The table had gone quiet. The players and spectators felt that a tension
had come between these two men. Suddenly there was the smell of enmity
where before there had been only jokes. A glove had been thrown down, by
the Englishman. Was it about the girl? Probably. The crowd licked its
lips.

Largo laughed sharply. He switched gaiety and bravado back on his face.
‘Aha!’ His voice was boisterous again, ‘My friend wishes to put the evil
eye upon my cards. We have a way to deal with that where I come from.’
He lifted a hand, and with only the first and little fingers
outstretched in a fork, he prodded once, like a snake striking, towards
Bond’s face. To the crowd it was a playful piece of theatre, but Bond,
within the strong aura of the man’s animal magnetism, felt the
ill-temper, the malevolence behind the old Mafia gesture.

Bond laughed good-naturedly. ‘That certainly put the hex on me. But what
did it do to the cards? Come on, your spectre against my spectre!’

Again the look of doubt came over Largo’s face. Why again the use of
this word? He gave the shoe a hefty slap. ‘All right, my friend. We are
wrestling the best of three falls. Here comes the third.’

Quickly his first two fingers licked out the four cards. The table had
hushed. Bond faced his pair inside his hand. He had a total of five—a
ten of clubs and a five of hearts. Five is a marginal number. One can
either draw or not. Bond folded the cards face down on the table. He
said, with the confident look of a man who has a six or a seven, ‘No
card, thank you.’

Largo’s eyes narrowed as he tried to read Bond’s face. He turned up his
cards, flicked them into the middle of the table with a gesture of
disgust. He also had a count of five. Now what was he to do? Draw or not
draw? He looked again at the quiet smile of confidence on Bond’s
face—and drew. It was a nine, the nine of spades. By drawing another
card instead of standing on his five and equalling Bond, he had drawn
and now had a four to Bond’s five.

Impassively Bond turned up his cards. He said, ‘I’m afraid you should
have killed the evil eye in the pack, not in me.’

There was a buzz of comment round the table. ‘But if the Italian had
stood on his five . . .’ ‘I always draw on a five.’ ‘I never do.’ ‘It
was bad luck.’ ‘No, it was bad play.’

Now it was an effort for Largo to keep the snarl off his face. But he
managed it, the forced smile lost its twist, the balled fists relaxed.
He took a deep breath and held out his hand to Bond. Bond took it,
folding his thumb inside his palm just in case Largo might give him a
bone-crusher with his vast machine-tool of a hand. But it was a firm
grasp and no more. Largo said, ‘Now I must wait for the shoe to come
round again. You have taken all my winnings. I have a hard evening’s
work ahead of me just when I was going to take my niece for a drink and
a dance.’ He turned to Domino. ‘My dear, I don’t think you know Mr Bond,
except on the telephone. I’m afraid he has upset my plans. You must find
someone else to squire you.’

Bond said, ‘How do you do. Didn’t we meet in the tobacconist’s this
morning?’

The girl screwed up her eyes. She said indifferently, ‘Yes? It is
possible. I have such a bad memory for faces.’

Bond said, ‘Well, could I give you a drink? I can just afford even a
Nassau drink now, thanks to the generosity of Mr Largo. And I have
finished here. This sort of thing can’t last. I mustn’t press my luck.’

The girl got up. She said ungraciously, ‘If you have nothing better to
do.’ She turned to Largo: ‘Emilio, perhaps if I take this Mr Bond away,
your luck will turn again. I will be in the supper room having caviar
and champagne. We must try and get as much of your funds as we can back
in the family.’

Largo laughed. His spirits had returned. He said. ‘You see, Mr Bond, you
are out of the frying pan into the fire. In Dominetta’s hands you may
not fare so well as in mine. See you later, my dear fellow. I must now
get back to the salt mines where you have consigned me.’

Bond said, ‘Well, thanks for the game. I will order champagne and caviar
for three. My spectre also deserves his reward.’ Wondering again whether
the shadow that flickered in Largo’s eyes at the word had more
significance than Italian superstition, he got up and followed the girl
between the crowded tables to the supper room.

Domino made for a shadowed table in the farthest corner of the room.
Walking behind her, Bond noticed for the first time that she had the
smallest trace of a limp. He found it endearing, a touch of childish
sweetness beneath the authority and blatant sex appeal of a girl to whom
he had been inclined to award that highest, but toughest, French
title—a _courtisane de marque_.

When the Clicquot rosé and fifty dollars’ worth of Beluga caviar
came—anything less, he had commented to her, would be no more than a
spoonful—he asked her about the limp. ‘Did you hurt yourself swimming
today?’

She looked at him gravely. ‘No. I have one leg an inch shorter than the
other. Does it displease you?’

‘No. It’s pretty. It makes you something of a child.’

‘Instead of a hard old kept woman. Yes?’ Her eyes challenged him.

‘Is that how you see yourself?’

‘It’s rather obvious isn’t it? Anyway, it’s what everyone in Nassau
thinks.’ She looked him squarely in the eyes, but with a touch of
pleading.

‘Nobody’s told me that. Anyway, I make up my own mind about men and
women. What’s the good of other people’s opinions? Animals don’t consult
each other about other animals. They look and sniff and feel. In love
and hate, and everything in between, those are the only tests that
matter. But people are unsure of their own instincts. They want
reassurance. So they ask someone else whether they should like a
particular person or not. And as the world loves bad news, they nearly
always get a bad answer—or at least a qualified one. Would you like to
know what I think of you?’

She smiled. ‘Every woman likes to hear about herself. Tell me, but make
it sound true, otherwise I shall stop listening.’

‘I think you’re a young girl, younger than you pretend to be, younger
than you dress. I think you were carefully brought up, in a red carpet
sort of way, and then the red carpet was suddenly jerked away from under
your feet and you were thrown more or less into the street. So you
picked yourself up and started to work your way back to the red carpet
you had got used to. You were probably fairly ruthless about it. You had
to be. You only had a woman’s weapons and you probably used them pretty
coolly. I expect you used your body. It would be a wonderful asset. But
in using it to get what you wanted, your sensibilities had to be put
aside. I don’t expect they’re very far underground. They certainly
haven’t atrophied. They’ve just lost their voice because you wouldn’t
listen to them. You couldn’t afford to listen to them if you were to get
back on that red carpet and have the things you wanted. And now you’ve
got the things.’ Bond touched the hand that lay on the banquette between
them. ‘And perhaps you’ve almost had enough of them.’ He laughed. ‘But I
mustn’t get too serious. Now about the smaller things. You know all
about them, but just for the record, you’re beautiful, sexy,
provocative, independent, self-willed, quick-tempered, and cruel.’

She looked at him thoughtfully. ‘There’s nothing very clever about all
that. I told you most of it. You know something about Italian women. But
why do you say I’m cruel?’

‘If I was gambling and I took a knock like Largo did and I had my woman,
a woman, sitting near me watching and she didn’t give me one word of
comfort or encouragement I would say she was being cruel. Men don’t like
failing in front of their women.’

She said impatiently, ‘I’ve had to sit there too often and watch him
show off. I wanted you to win. I cannot pretend. You didn’t mention my
only virtue. It’s honesty. I love to the hilt and I hate to the hilt. At
the present time, with Emilio, I am half way. Where we were lovers, we
are now good friends who understand each other. When I told you he was
my guardian, I was telling a white lie. I am his kept woman. I am a bird
in a gilded cage. I am fed up with my cage and tired of my bargain.’ She
looked at Bond defensively. ‘Yes, it is cruel for Emilio. But it is also
human. You can buy the outside of the body, but you cannot buy what is
inside—what people call the heart and soul. But Emilio knows that. He
wants women for use. Not for love. He has had thousands in this way. He
knows where we both stand. He is realistic. But it is becoming more
difficult to keep to my bargain—to, to, let’s call it sing for my
supper.’

She stopped abruptly. She said, ‘Give me some more champagne. All this
silly talking has made me thirsty. And I would like a packet of
Players’—she laughed—‘Please, as they say in the advertisements. I am
fed up with just smoking smoke. I need my Hero.’

Bond bought a packet from the cigarette girl. He said, ‘What’s that
about a hero?’

She had entirely changed. Her bitterness had gone, and the lines of
strain on her face. She had softened. She was suddenly a girl out for
the evening. ‘Ah, you don’t know! My one true love! The man of my
dreams. The sailor on the front of the packet of Players. You have never
thought about him as I have.’ She came closer to him on the banquette
and held the packet under his eyes. ‘You don’t understand the romance of
this wonderful picture—one of the great masterpieces of the world. This
man,’ she pointed, ‘was the first man I ever sinned with. I took him
into the woods, I loved him in the dormitory, I spent nearly all my
pocket money on him. In exchange, he introduced me to the great world
outside the Cheltenham Ladies College. He grew me up. He put me at ease
with boys of my own age. He kept me company when I was lonely or afraid
of being young. He encouraged me, gave me assurance. Have you never
thought of the romance behind this picture? You see nothing, yet the
whole of England is there! Listen,’ she took his arm eagerly, ‘this is
the story of Hero, the name on his cap badge. At first he was a young
man, a powder monkey or whatever they called it, in that sailing ship
behind his right ear. It was a hard time for him. Weevils in the
biscuits, hit with marlinspikes and ropes’ ends and things, sent up
aloft to the top of all that rigging where the flag flies. But he
persevered. He began to grow a moustache. He was fair-haired and rather
too pretty,’ she giggled, ‘he may even have had to fight for his virtue,
or whatever men call it, among all those hammocks. But you can see from
his face—that line of concentration between his eyes—and from his fine
head, that he was a man to get on.’ She paused and swallowed a glass of
champagne. The dimples were now deep holes in her cheeks. ‘Are you
listening to me? You are not bored having to listen about my hero?’

‘I’m only jealous. Go on.’

‘So he went all over the world—to India, China, Japan, America. He had
many girls and many fights with cutlasses and fists. He wrote home
regularly—to his mother and to a married sister who lived at Dover.
They wanted him to come home and meet a nice girl and get married. But
he wouldn’t. You see, he was keeping himself for a dream girl who looked
rather like me. And then,’ she laughed, ‘the first steamships came in
and he was transferred to an ironclad—that’s the picture of it on the
right. And by now he was a bosun, whatever that is, and very important.
And he saved up from his pay and instead of going out fighting and
having girls he grew that lovely beard, to make himself look older and
more important, and he set to with a needle and coloured threads to make
that picture of himself. You can see how well he did it—his first
windjammer and his last ironclad with the lifebuoy as a frame. He only
finished it when he decided to leave the Navy. He didn’t really like
steamships. In the prime of life, don’t you agree? And even then he ran
out of gold thread to finish the rope round the lifebuoy, so he just had
to tail it off. There, you can see on the right where the rope crosses
the blue line. So he came back home on a beautiful golden evening after
a wonderful life in the Navy and it was so sad and beautiful and
romantic that he decided that he would put the beautiful evening into
another picture. So he bought a pub at Bristol with his savings and in
the mornings before the pub opened he worked away until he had finished
and there you can see the little sailing ship that brought him home from
Suez with his duffel bag full of silks and seashells and souvenirs
carved out of wood. And that’s the Needles Lighthouse beckoning him in
to harbour on that beautiful calm evening. Mark you,’ she frowned, ‘I
don’t like that sort of bonnet thing he’s wearing for a hat, and I’d
have liked him to have put “HMS” before the “_Hero_”, but you can see
that would have made it lop-sided and he wouldn’t have been able to get
all the “_Hero_” in. But you must admit it’s the most terrifically
romantic picture. I cut it off my first packet, when I smoked one in the
lavatory and felt terribly sick, and kept it until it fell to pieces.
Then I cut off a fresh one. I carried him with me always until things
went wrong and I had to go back to Italy. Then I couldn’t afford
Players. They’re too expensive in Italy and I had to smoke things called
Nazionales.’

Bond wanted to keep her mood. He said, ‘But what happened to the hero’s
pictures? How did the cigarette people get hold of them?’

‘Oh well, you see one day a man with a stove-pipe hat and a frock coat
came into the hero’s pub with two small boys. Here,’ she held the packet
sideways, ‘those are the ones, “John Player & Sons”. You see, it says
that their Successors run the business now. Well, they had one of the
first motor-cars, a Rolls-Royce, and it had broken down outside the
hero’s pub. The man in the stove-pipe hat didn’t drink of course—those
sort of people didn’t, not the respectable merchants who lived near
Bristol. So he asked for ginger beer and bread and cheese while his
chauffeur mended the car. And the hero got it for them. And Mr John
Player and the boys all admired the two wonderful tapestry pictures
hanging on the wall of the pub. Now this Mr Player was in the tobacco
and snuff business and cigarettes had just been invented and he wanted
to start making them. But he couldn’t for the life of him know what to
call them or what sort of a picture to put on the packet. And he
suddenly had a wonderful idea. When he got back to the factory he talked
to his manager and the manager came along to the pub and saw the hero
and offered him a hundred pounds to let his two pictures be copied for
the cigarette packet. And the hero didn’t mind and anyway he wanted just
exactly a hundred pounds to get married on.’ She paused. Her eyes were
far away. ‘She was very nice, by the way, only thirty and a good plain
cook and her young body kept him warm in bed until he died many years
later. And she bore him two children, a boy and a girl. And the boy went
into the Navy like his father. Well, anyway, Mr Player wanted to have
the hero in the lifebuoy on one side of the packet and the beautiful
evening on the other. But the manager pointed out that that would leave
no room for all this’—she turned over the packet—‘about “Rich, Cool”,
and “Navy Cut Tobacco” and that extraordinary trade mark of a doll’s
house swimming in chocolate fudge with Nottingham Castle written
underneath. So then Mr Player said, “Well then, we’ll put one on top of
the other.” And that’s just exactly what they did and I must say I think
it fits in very well, don’t you? Though I expect the hero was pretty
annoyed at the mermaid being blanked out.’

‘The mermaid?’

‘Oh yes. Underneath the bottom corner of the lifebuoy where it dips into
the sea, the hero had put a tiny mermaid combing her hair with one hand
and beckoning him home with the other. That was supposed to be the woman
he was going to find and marry. But you can see there wasn’t room and
anyway her breasts were showing and Mr Player, who was a very strong
Quaker, didn’t think that was quite proper. But he made it up to the
Hero in the end.’

‘Oh, how did he do that?’

‘Well you see the cigarettes were a great success. It was really the
picture that did it. People decided that anything with a wonderful
picture like that on the outside must be good and Mr Player made a
fortune and I expect his Successors did too. So when the hero was
getting old and hadn’t got long to live, Mr Player had a copy of the
lifebuoy picture drawn by the finest artist of the day. It was just the
same as the Hero’s except that it wasn’t in colour and it showed him
very much older, and he promised the Hero that this picture too would
always be on his cigarette packets, only on the inside bit. Here.’ She
pushed out the cardboard container. ‘You see how old he looks? And one
other thing, if you look closely, the flags on the two ships are flying
at half mast. Rather sweet of Mr Player, don’t you think, to ask the
artist for that. It meant that the Hero’s first and last ships were
remembering him. And Mr Player and his two sons came and presented it to
him just before he died. It must have made it much easier for him, don’t
you think?’

‘It certainly must. Mr Player must have been a very thoughtful man.’

The girl was slowly returning from her dreamland. She said in a
different, rather prim voice, ‘Well, thank you anyway for having
listened to the story. I know it’s all a fairy tale. At least I suppose
it is. But children are stupid in that way. They like to have something
to keep under the pillow until they’re quite grown up—a rag doll or a
small toy or something. I know that boys are just the same. My brother
hung on to a little metal charm his nanny had given him until he was
nineteen. Then he lost it. I shall never forget the scenes he made. Even
though he was in the air force by then and it was the middle of the war.
He said it brought him luck.’ She shrugged her shoulders. There was
sarcasm in her voice as she said, ‘He needn’t have worried. He did all
right. He was much older than me, but I adored him. I still do. Girls
always love crooks, particularly if they’re their brother. He did so
well that he might have done something for me. But he never did. He said
that life was every man for himself. He said that his grandfather had
been so famous as a poacher and a smuggler in the Dolomites that his was
the finest tombstone among all the Petacchi graves in the graveyard at
Bolzano. My brother said he was going to have a finer one still, and by
making money the same way.’

Bond held his cigarette steady. He took a long draw at it and let the
smoke out with a quiet hiss. ‘Is your family name Petacchi then?’

‘Oh yes. Vitali is only a stage name. It sounded better so I changed it.
Nobody knows the other. I’ve almost forgotten it myself. I’ve called
myself Vitali since I came back to Italy. I wanted to change
everything.’

‘What happened to your brother? What was his first name?’

‘Giuseppe. He went wrong in various ways. But he was a wonderful flyer.
Last time I heard of him he’d been given some high-up job in Paris.
Perhaps that’ll make him settle down. I pray every night that it will.
He’s all I’ve got. I love him in spite of everything. You understand
that?’

Bond stabbed out his cigarette in the ashtray. He called for the bill.
He said, ‘Yes, I understand that.’




                                   16


                        _Swimming the Gauntlet_

The dark water below the police wharf sucked and kissed at the rusty
iron stanchions. In the latticed shadows cast through the ironwork by
the three-quarter moon. Constable Santos heaved the single aqualung
cylinder up on to Bond’s back and Bond secured the webbing at his waist
so that it would not snarl the strap of Leiter’s second Geiger counter,
the underwater model. He fitted the rubber mouthpiece between his teeth
and adjusted the valve release until the air supply was just right. He
turned off the supply and took out the mouthpiece. The music of the
steel band in the Junkanoo night-club tripped gaily out over the water.
It sounded like a giant spider dancing on a tenor xylophone.

Santos was a huge coloured man, naked except for his swimming trunks,
with pectoral muscles the size of dinner plates. Bond said, ‘What should
I expect to see at this time of night? Any big fish about?’

Santos grinned. ‘Usual harbour stuff, sah. Some barracuda perhaps. Mebbe
a shark. But they’s lazy an overfed with the refuse and muck from de
drains. Dey won’t trouble you—less you bleedin’ that is. They’ll be
night-crawlin’ things on the bottom—lobster, crab, mebbe a small
pus-feller or two. The bottom’s mostly seagrass on bits o’ iron from
wrecks an plenty of bottle and suchlike. Mucky, if you get me, sah. But
the water’s clear and you’ll be hokay with this moon and the lights from
the _Disco_ to guide you. Tek you bout twelve, fifteen minute, I’da say.
Funny ting. I been lookin’ for an hour and dere’s no watchman on deck
and no one in the wheelhouse. An the bit o’ breeze should hide you
bubbles. Coulda give you an oxygen re-breather, but ah doan like dem
tings. Them dangerous.’

‘All right, let’s go then. See you in about half an hour.’ Bond felt for
the knife at his waist, shifted the webbing and put the mouthpiece
between his teeth. He turned on the air and, his fins slapping on the
muddy sand, walked down and into the water. There he bent down, spat
into his mask to prevent it steaming up, washed it and adjusted it. Then
he walked slowly on, getting used to the breathing. By the end of the
wharf he was up to his ears. He quietly submerged and launched himself
forward into an easy leg crawl, his hands along his flanks.

The mud shelved steeply and Bond kept on going down, until, at about
forty feet, he was only a few inches above the bottom. He glanced at the
big luminous figures on the dial of his watch—12.10. He untensed
himself and put his legs into an easy, relaxed rhythm.

Through the roof of small waves the pale moonlight flickered on the grey
bottom, and the refuse—motor tyres, cans, bottles—cast black shadows.
A small octopus, feeling his shock-wave, turned from dark brown to pale
grey and squeezed itself softly back into the mouth of the oil-drum that
was its home. Sea flowers, the gelatinous polyps that grow out of the
sand at night, whisked down their holes as Bond’s black shadow touched
them. Other tiny night things puffed thin jets of silt out of their
small volcanoes in the mud as they felt the tremor of Bond’s passage,
and an occasional hermit crab snapped itself back into its borrowed
shell. It was like travelling across a moon landscape, on and under
which many mysterious creatures lived minute lives. Bond watched it all,
carefully, as if he had been an underwater naturalist. He knew that was
the way to keep nerves steady under the sea—to focus the whole
attention on the people who lived there and not try and probe the
sinister grey walls of mist for imaginary monsters.

The rhythm of his steady progress soon became automatic, and while Bond,
keeping the moon at his right shoulder, held to his course, his mind
reached back to Domino. So she was the sister of the man who probably
hi-jacked the plane! Probably even Largo, if Largo was in fact involved
in the plot, didn’t know this. So what did the relationship amount to?
Coincidence. It could be nothing else. Her whole manner was so entirely
innocent. And yet it was one more thin straw to add to the meagre pile
that seemed in some indeterminate way to be adding up to Largo’s
involvement. And Largo’s reaction at the word ‘spectre’. That could be
put down to Italian superstition—or it could not. Bond had a deadly
feeling that all these tiny scraps amounted to the tip of an iceberg—a
few feet of ice pinnacle, with below, a thousand tons of the stuff.
Should he report? Or shouldn’t he? Bond’s mind boiled with indecision.
How to put it? How to grade the intelligence so that it would reflect
his doubts? How much to say and how much to leave out?

The extrasensory antennae of the human body, the senses left over from
the jungle life of millions of years ago, sharpen unconsciously when man
knows that he is on the edge of danger. Bond’s mind was concentrating on
something far away from his present risks, but beneath his conscious
thoughts his senses were questing for enemies. Now suddenly the alarm
was sounded by a hidden nerve—Danger! Danger! Danger!

Bond’s body tensed. His hand went to his knife and his head swivelled
sharply to the right—not to the left or behind him. His senses told him
to look to the right.

A big barracuda, if it is twenty pounds or over, is the most fearsome
fish in the seas. Clean and straight and malevolent, it is all hostile
weapon from the long snarling mouth in the cruel jaw that can open like
a rattlesnake’s to an angle of ninety degrees, along the blue and silver
steel of the body to the lazy power of the tail-fin that helps to make
this fish one of the five fastest sprinters in the seas. This one,
moving parallel with Bond, ten yards away just inside the wall of grey
mist that was the edge of visibility, was showing its danger signals.
The broad lateral stripes showed vividly—the angry hunting sign—the
gold and black tiger’s eye was on him, watchful, incurious, and the long
mouth was open half an inch so that the moonlight glittered on the
sharpest row of teeth in the ocean—teeth that don’t bite at the flesh,
teeth that tear out a chunk and swallow and then hit and scythe again.

Bond’s stomach crawled with the ants of fear and his skin tightened at
his groin. Cautiously he glanced at his watch. About three more minutes
to go before he was due to come up with the _Disco_. He made a sudden
turn and attacked fast towards the great fish, flashing his knife in
fast offensive lunges. The giant barracuda gave a couple of lazy wags of
its tail and, when Bond turned back on his course, it also turned and
resumed its indolent, sneering cruise, weighing him up, choosing which
bit—the shoulder, the buttock, the foot—to take first.

Bond tried to recall what he knew about big predator fish, what he had
experienced with them before. The first rule was not to panic, to be
unafraid. Fear communicates itself to fish as it does to dogs and
horses. Establish a quiet pattern of behaviour and stick to it. Don’t
show confusion or act chaotically. In the sea, untidiness, ragged
behaviour, mean that the possible victim is out of control, vulnerable.
So keep to a rhythm. A thrashing fish is everyone’s prey. A crab or a
shell thrown upside down by a wave is offering its underside to a
hundred enemies. A fish on its side is a dead fish. Bond trudged
rhythmically on, exuding immunity.

Now the pale moonscape changed. A meadow of soft seagrass showed up
ahead. In the deep, slow currents it waved languidly, like deep fur. The
hypnotic motion made Bond feel slightly seasick. Dotted sparsely in the
grass were the big black footballs of dead sponges growing out of the
sand like giant puffballs—Nassau’s only export until a fungus had got
at them and had killed the sponge crop as surely as myxomatosis has
killed rabbits. Bond’s black shadow flickered across the breathing lawn
like a clumsy bat. To the right of his shadow, the thin black lance cast
by the barracuda moved with quiet precision.

A dense mass of silvery small fry showed up ahead, suspended in mid
stream as if they had been bottled in aspic. When the two parallel
bodies approached, the mass divided sharply, leaving wide channels for
the two enemies, and then closing behind them into the phalanx they
adopted for an illusory protection. Through the cloud of fish, Bond
watched the barracuda. It moved majestically on, ignoring the food
around it as a fox creeping up on the chicken run will ignore the
rabbits in the warren. Bond sealed himself in the armour of his rhythm,
transmitting to the barracuda that he was a bigger, a more dangerous
fish, that the barracuda must not be misled by the whiteness of the
flesh.

Amongst the waving grass, the black barb of the anchor looked like
another enemy. The trailing chain rose from the bottom and disappeared
into the upper mists. Bond followed it up, forgetting the barracuda in
his relief at hitting the target and in the excitement of what he might
find.

Now he swam very slowly, watching the white explosion of the moon on the
surface contract and define itself. Once he looked down. There was no
sign of the barracuda. Perhaps the anchor and chain had seemed inimical.
The long hull of the ship grew out of the upper mists and took shape, a
great Zeppelin in the water. The folded mechanism of the hydrofoil
looked ungainly, as if it did not belong. Bond clung for a moment to its
starboard flange to get his bearings. Far down to his left, the big twin
screws, bright in the moonlight, hung suspended, motionless but somehow
charged with thrashing speed. Bond moved slowly along the hull towards
them, staring upwards for what he sought. He drew in his breath. Yes, it
was there, the ridge of a wide hatch below the waterline. Bond groped
over it, measuring. About twelve feet square, divided down the centre.
Bond paused for a moment, wondering what was inside the closed doors. He
pressed the switch of the Geiger counter and held the machine against
the steel plates. He watched the dial of the meter on his left wrist. It
trembled to show the machine was alive, but it registered only the
fraction Leiter had told him to expect from the hull. Bond switched the
thing off. So much for that. Now for home.

The clang beside his ear and the sharp impact against his left shoulder
were simultaneous. Automatically, Bond sprang back from the hull. Below
him the bright needle of the spear wavered slowly down into the depths.
Bond whirled. The man, his black rubber suit glinting like armour in the
moonlight, was pedalling furiously in the water while he thrust another
spear down the barrel of the CO2 gun. Bond hurled himself towards him,
flailing at the water with his fins. The man pulled back the loading
lever and levelled the gun. Bond knew he couldn’t make it. He was six
strokes away. He stopped suddenly, ducked his head, and jack-knifed
down. He felt the small shock-wave of the silent explosion of gas and
something hit his foot. Now! He soared up below the man and scythed
upwards with his knife. The blade went in. He felt the black rubber
against his hand. Then the butt of the gun hit him behind the ear and a
white hand came down and scrabbled at his air-pipe. Bond slashed wildly
with the knife, his hand moving with terrifying slowness through the
water. The point ripped something. The hand let go of the mask, but now
Bond couldn’t see. Again the butt of the gun crashed down on his head.
Now the water was full of black smoke, heavy, stringy stuff that clung
to the glass of his mask. Bond backed painfully, slowly away, clawing at
the glass. At last it cleared. The black smoke was coming out of the
man, out of his stomach. But the gun was coming up again slowly,
agonizingly, as if it weighed a ton, and the bright sting of the spear
showed at its mouth. Now the webbed feet were hardly stirring, but the
man was sinking slowly down to Bond’s level. Suspended straight in the
water, he looked like one of those little celluloid figures in a Ptolemy
jar that rise and fall gracefully with pressure on the rubber top to the
jar. Bond couldn’t get his limbs to obey. They felt like lead. He shook
his head to clear it, but still his hands and flippers moved only half
consciously, all speed gone. Now he could see the bared teeth round the
other man’s rubber mouthpiece. The gun was at his head, at his throat,
at his heart. Bond’s hands crept up his chest to protect him while his
flippers moved sluggishly, like broken wings, below him.

And then, suddenly, the man was hurled towards Bond as if he had been
kicked in the back. His arms spread in a curious gesture of embrace for
Bond and the gun tumbled slowly away between them and disappeared. A
puff of black blood spread out into the sea from behind the man’s back
and his hands wavered out and up in vague surrender while his head
twisted on his shoulders to see what had done this to him.

And now, a few yards behind the man, shreds of black rubber hanging from
its jaws, Bond saw the barracuda. It was lying broadside on, seven or
eight feet of silver and blue torpedo, and round its jaws there was a
thin mist of blood, the taste in the water that had triggered its
attack.

Now the great tiger’s eye looked coldly at Bond and then downwards at
the slowly sinking man. It gave a horrible yawning gulp to rid itself of
the shreds of rubber, turned lazily three-quarters on, quivered in all
its length and dived like a bolt of white light. It hit the man on the
right shoulder with wide open jaws, shook him once, furiously, like a
dog with a rat, and then backed away. Bond felt the vomit rising in his
gorge like molten lava. He swallowed it down and slowly, as if in a
dream, began swimming with languid, sleepy strokes away from the scene.

Bond had not gone many yards when something hit the surface to his left
and the moonlight glinted on a silvery kind of egg that turned lazily
over and over as it went down. It meant nothing to Bond, but, two
strokes later, he received a violent blow in the stomach that knocked
him sideways. It also knocked sense into him and he began to move fast
through the water, at the same time planing downwards towards the
bottom. More buffets hit him in quick succession, but the grenades were
bracketing the blood patch near the ship’s hull and the shock-waves of
the explosion became less.

The bottom showed up—the friendly waving fur, the great black
toadstools of the dead sponges and the darting shoals of small fish
fleeing with Bond from the explosions. Now Bond swam with all his
strength. At any moment a boat would be got over the side and another
diver would go down. With any luck he would find no traces of Bond’s
visit and conclude that the underwater sentry had been killed by shark
or barracuda. It would be interesting to see what Largo would report to
the harbour police. Difficult to explain the necessity for an armed
underwater sentry for a pleasure yacht in a peaceful harbour!

Bond trudged on across the shifting seagrass. His head ached furiously.
Gingerly he put up a hand and felt the two great bruises. The skin felt
intact. But for the cushion of water, the two blows with the butt of the
gun would have knocked him out. As it was, he still felt half stunned
and when he came to the end of the seagrass and to the soft white moon
landscape with its occasional little volcano puffs from the sea-worms he
felt as if he was on the edge of delirium. Wild commotion at the edge of
his field of vision shocked him out of the semi-trance. A giant fish,
the barracuda, was passing him. It seemed to have gone mad. It was
snaking along, biting at its tail, its long body curling and snapping
back in a jack-knife motion, its mouth opening wide and shutting again
in spasms. Bond watched it hurtle away into the grey mist. He felt
somehow sorry to see the wonderful king of the sea reduced to this
hideous jiggling automaton. There was something obscene about it, like
the blind weaving of a punchy boxer before he finally crashes to the
canvas. One of the explosions must have crushed a nerve centre, wrecked
some delicate balance mechanism in the fish’s brain. It wouldn’t last
long. A greater predator than itself, a shark, would note the signs, the
loss of symmetry that is suicide in the seas. He would follow for a
while until the spasms slackened. Then the shark would make a short
jabbing run. The barracuda would react sluggishly and that would be the
end—in three great grunting bites, the head first and then the still
jerking body. And the shark would cruise quietly on, its sickle mouth
trailing morsels for the black and yellow pilot fish below his jaws and
perhaps for the remora or two, the parasites that travel with the great
host, that pick the shark’s teeth when it is sleeping and the jaws are
relaxed.

And now there were the grey-slimed motor tyres, the bottles, the cans
and the scaffolding of the wharf. Bond slid over the shelving sand and
knelt in the shallows, his head down, not capable of carrying the heavy
aqualung up the beach, an exhausted animal ready to drop.




                                   17


                        _The Red-eyed Catacomb_

Bond, putting on his clothes, dodged the comments of Constable Santos.
It seemed there had been sort of underwater explosions, with eruptions
on the surface, on the starboard side of the yacht. Several men had
appeared on deck and there had been some kind of commotion. A boat had
been lowered on the port side, out of sight of the shore. Bond said he
knew nothing of these things. He had cracked his head against the side
of the ship. Silly thing to do. He had seen what he had wanted to see
and had then swum back. Entirely successful. The Constable had been a
great help. Thank you very much and good night. Bond would be seeing the
Commissioner in the morning.

Bond walked with careful steadiness up the side street to where he had
parked Leiter’s Ford. He got to the hotel and telephoned Leiter’s room
and together they drove to police headquarters. Bond described what had
happened and what he had discovered. Now he didn’t care what the
consequences might be. He was going to make a report. It was eight am in
London and there were under forty hours to go to zero hour. All these
straws added up to half a haystack. His suspicions were boiling like a
pressure cooker. He couldn’t sit on the lid any longer.

Leiter said decisively, ‘You do just that. And I’ll file a copy to CIA
and endorse it. What’s more I’m going to call up the _Manta_ and tell
her to get the hell over here.’

‘You are?’ Bond was amazed at this change of tune. ‘What’s got into you
all of a sudden?’

‘Well, I was sculling around the Casino taking a good look at anyone I
thought might be a shareholder or a treasure hunter. They were mostly in
groups, standing around trying to put up the front of having a good
time—a sunshine holiday and all that. They weren’t succeeding. Largo
was doing all the work, being gay and boyish. The others looked like
private dicks or the rest of the Torrio gang just after the St
Valentine’s Day massacre. Never seen such a bunch of thugs in my
life—dressed up in tuxedos and smoking cigars and drinking champagne
and all that—just a glass or two to show the Christmas spirit. Orders,
I suppose. But all of them with that smell one gets to know in the
Service, or in Pinkertons for the matter of that. You know, careful,
cold-fish, thinking-of-something-else kinda look the pros have. Well,
none of the faces meant anything to me until I came across a little guy
with a furrowed brow and a big egghead with pebble glasses who looked
like a Mormon who’s got into a whorehouse by mistake. He was peering
about nervously and every time one of these other guys spoke to him he
blushed and said what a wonderful place it was and he was having a swell
time. I got close enough to hear him say the same thing to two different
guys. Rest of the time he just mooned around, sort of helpless and
almost sucking a corner of his handkerchief, if you get me. Well that
face meant something to me. I knew I’d seen it before somewhere. You
know how it is. So after puzzling for a bit I went to the reception and
told one of the guys behind the desk in a cheery fashion that I thought
I’d located an old class-mate who’d migrated to Europe, but I couldn’t
for the life of me remember his name. Very embarrassing as he seemed to
recognize me. Would the guy help? So he came along and I pointed this
feller out and he went back to his desk and went through the membership
cards and came up with the one I wanted. Seemed he was a man called
Traut, Emil Traut. Swiss passport. One of Mr Largo’s group from the
yacht.’ Leiter paused. ‘Well I guess it was the Swiss passport that did
it.’ He turned to Bond. ‘Remember a fellow called Kotze, East German
physicist? Came over to the West about five years ago and sang all he
knew to the Joint Scientific Intelligence boys? Then he disappeared,
thanks to a fat payment for the info, and went to ground in Switzerland.
Well, James, take my word for it. That’s the same guy. The file went
through my hands when I was still with CIA doing desk work in
Washington. All came back to me. It was one hell of a scoop at the time.
Only saw his mug on the file, but there’s absolutely no doubt about it.
That man’s Kotze. And now what the hell is a top physicist doing on
board the _Disco_? Fits doesn’t it?’

They had come to police headquarters. Lights burned only on the ground
floor. Bond waited until they had reported to the duty sergeant and had
gone up to their room before he answered. He stood in the middle of the
room and looked at Leiter. He said, ‘That’s the clincher, Felix. So now
what do we do?’

‘With what you got this evening, I’d pull the whole lot in on suspicion.
No question at all.’

‘Suspicion of what? Largo would reach for his lawyer and they’d be out
in five minutes. Democratic processes of the law and so forth. And what
single fact have we got that Largo couldn’t dodge? All right, so Traut
is Kotze. We’re hunting for treasure, gentlemen, we need an expert
mineralogist. This man offered his services. Said his name was Traut. No
doubt he’s still worried about the Russians getting after him. Next
question? Yes, we’ve got an underwater compartment on the _Disco_. We’re
going to hunt treasure through it. Inspect it? Well, if you must. There
you are, gentlemen—underwater gear, skids, perhaps even a small
bathyscaphe. Underwater sentry? Of course. People have spent six months
trying to find out what we’re after, how we’re going to get it. We’re
professionals, gentlemen. We like to keep our secrets. And anyway, what
was this Mr Bond, this rich gentleman looking for a property in Nassau,
doing underneath my ship in the middle of the night? Petacchi? Never
heard of him. Don’t care what Miss Vitali’s family name was. Always
known her as Vitali . . .’ Bond made a throwaway gesture with one hand.
‘See what I mean? This treasure-hunting cover is perfect. It explains
everything. And what are we left with? Largo pulls himself up to his
full height and says, “Thanks, gentlemen. So I may go now? And so I
shall, within the hour, I shall find another base for my work and you
will be hearing from my lawyers forthwith—wrongful detention and
trespass. And good luck to your tourist trade, gentlemen.”’ Bond smiled
grimly. ‘See what I mean?’

Leiter said impatiently. ‘So what do we do? Limpet mine? Send her to the
bottom—in error, so to speak?’

‘No. We’re going to wait.’ At the expression on Leiter’s face, Bond held
up a hand. ‘We’re going to send our report, in careful, guarded terms so
we don’t get an airborne division landing on Windsor Field. And we’re
going to say the _Manta_ is all we need. And so it is. With her, we can
keep tabs on the _Disco_ just as we please. And we’ll stay under cover,
keep a hidden watch on the yacht and see what happens. At present we’re
not suspected. Largo’s plan, if there is one, that is, and don’t forget
this treasure-hunting business still covers everything perfectly well,
is going along all right. All he’s got to do now is collect the bombs
and make for Target No 1 ready for zero hour in around thirty hours’
time. We can do absolutely nothing to him until he’s got one or both of
those bombs on board or we catch him at their hiding place. Now, that
can’t be far away. Nor can the Vindicator, if she’s hereabouts. So
tomorrow we take that amphibian they’ve got for us and hunt the area
inside a radius of a hundred miles. We’ll hunt the seas and not the
land. She must be in a shoal water somewhere and damned well hidden.
With this calm weather, we should be able to locate her—if she’s here.
Now, come on! Let’s get those reports off and get some sleep. And say
we’re out of communication for ten hours. And disconnect your telephone
when you get back to your room. However careful we are, this signal is
going to set the Potomac on fire as well as the Thames.’

                                   ★

Six hours later, in the crystal light of early morning, they were out at
Windsor Field and the ground crew was hauling the little Grumman
Amphibian out of the hangar with a jeep. They had climbed on board and
Leiter was gunning the engines when a uniformed motorcycle dispatch
rider came driving uncertainly towards them, across the tarmac.

Bond said, ‘Get going! Quick! Here comes paper-work.’

Leiter released the brakes and taxi’d fast towards the single
north-south runway. The radio cracked angrily. Leiter took a careful
look over the sky. It was clear. He slowly pushed down on the joystick
and the little plane snarled its way faster and faster down the concrete
and, with a final bump, soared off over the low bush. The radio still
crackled. Leiter reached up and switched it off.

Bond sat with the Admiralty chart on his lap. They were flying north.
They had decided to start with the Grand Bahama group and have a first
look at the possible area of Target No 1. They flew at a thousand feet.
Below them the Berry Islands were a necklace of brown spits set in cream
and emerald and turquoise. ‘See what I mean?’ said Bond. ‘You can see
anything big through that water down to fifty feet. Anything as big as
the Vindicator would have been spotted anywhere on any of the air
routes. So I’ve marked off the areas where there’s the minimum traffic.
They’d have ditched somewhere well out of the way. Assuming, and it’s
the hell of an assumption, that when the _Disco_ made off to the
south-east on the night of the third, it was a ruse, it’ll be reasonable
to hunt to the north and the west. She was away eight hours. Two of
those would have been at anchor doing the salvage work. That leaves six
hours’ sailing at around thirty knots. Cut an hour off for laying the
false trail, and that leaves five. I’ve marked off an area from the
Grand Bahamas down to south of the Bimini group. That fits—if anything
fits.’

‘Did you get on to the Commissioner?’

‘Yes. He’s going to have a couple of good men with day-and-night glasses
keeping an eye on the _Disco_. If she moves from her Palmyra anchorage
where she’s due back at midday, and if we’re not back in time, he’ll
have her shadowed by one of the Bahama Airways charter planes. I got him
quite worried with just one or two bits of information. He wanted to go
to the Governor with the story. I said not yet. He’s a good man. Just
doesn’t want too much responsibility without someone else’s okay. I used
the PM’s name to keep him quiet until we get back. He’ll play all right.
When do you think the _Manta_ could be here?’

‘S’evening, I’d say.’ Leiter’s voice was uneasy. ‘I must have been drunk
last night to have sent for her. Christ, we’re creating one hell of a
flap, James. It doesn’t look too good in the cold light of dawn. Anyway,
what the hell? There’s Grand Bahama coming up dead ahead. Want me to
give the rocket base a buzz? Prohibited flying area, but we might as
well go in up to our ears while we’re about it. Just listen to the
bawling out we’ll be getting in just a minute or two.’ He reached up and
switched on the radio.

They flew eastwards along the fifty miles of beautiful coast towards
what looked like a small city of aluminium hutments amongst which red
and white and silver structures rose like small skyscrapers above the
low roofs. ‘That’s it,’ said Leiter. ‘See the yellow warning balloons at
the corners of the base? Warning to aircraft and fishermen. There’s a
flight test on this morning. Better get out to sea a bit and keep south.
If it’s a full test, they’ll be firing towards Ascension Island—about
five thousand miles east. Off the African coast. Don’t want to get an
Atlas missile up our backsides. Look over there to the left—sticking up
like a pencil beside that red and white gantry! Atlas or a
Titan—intercontinental. Or might be a prototype Polaris. The other two
gantries’ll be for Matador and Snark and perhaps your Thunderbird. That
big gun thing, like a howitzer, that’s the camera tracker. The two
saucer-shaped reflectors are the radar screen. Golly! One of them’s
turning away towards us! We’re going to get hell in a minute. That strip
of concrete down the middle of the island. That’s the skid strip for
bringing in missiles that are recallable. Can’t see the central control
for telemetering and guidance and destruction of the things if they go
mad. That’ll be underground—one of those squat block-house things. Some
brass hat’ll be sitting down there with his staff getting all set for
the count-down or whatever’s going to happen and telling someone to do
something about that goddam little plane that’s fouling up the works.’

Above their heads the radio crackled. A metallic voice said, ‘N/AKOI,
N/AKOI. You’re in a prohibited area. Can you hear me. Change course
southwards immediately. N/AKOI. This is Grand Bahamas Rocket Base. Keep
clear. Keep clear.’

Leiter said, ‘Oh hell! No use interfering with world progress. Anyway
we’ve seen all we want. No good getting on the Windsor Field report to
add to our troubles.’ He banked the little plane sharply. ‘But you see
what I mean? If that little heap of ironmongery isn’t worth a quarter of
a billion dollars my name’s P. Rick. And it’s just about a hundred miles
from Nassau. Perfect for the _Disco_.’

The radio started again: ‘N/AKOI, N/AKOI. You will be reported for
entering a prohibited area and for failing to acknowledge. Keep flying
south and watch out for sudden turbulence. Over.’ The radio went silent.

Leiter said, ‘That means they’re going to fire a test. Keep an eye on
them and let me know when. I’ll cut down the revs. No harm in watching
ten million dollars of the taxpayer’s money being blown off. Look! The
radar scanner’s turned back to the east. They’ll be sweating it out in
that block-house all right. I’ve seen ’em at it. Lights’ll be blinking
all over the big board way down underground. The kibitzers’ll be at
their periscopes. Voices’ll come down over the PA System. “Beacon
contact. . . Warning balloons up . . . Telemeter contact . . . Tank
pressure okay . . . Gyros okay . . . Rocket-tank pressure correct . . .
Rocket clear . . . . Recorders alive . . . Lights all green . . . Ten,
nine, eight, seven, six . . . Fire!”’

Despite Leiter’s graphic count-down, nothing happened. Then, through his
glasses, Bond saw a wisp of steam coming from the base of the rocket.
Then a great cloud of steam and smoke and a flash of bright light that
turned red. Breathlessly, for there was something terrible in the sight,
Bond gave the blow-by-blow to Leiter. ‘It’s edging up off the pad.
There’s a jet of flame. It seems to be sitting on it. Now it’s going up
like a lift. Now it’s off! God, it’s going fast! Now there’s nothing but
a spark of fire in the sky. Now it’s gone. Whew!’ Bond mopped his brow.
‘Remember that Moonraker job I was on a few years back? Interesting to
see what the people out front saw.’

‘Yeah. You were lucky to get out of that deep fry.’ Leiter brushed aside
Bond’s reminiscences. ‘Now then, next stop those spits in the ocean
north of Bimini and then a good run down the Bimini Group. Around
seventy miles south-west. Keep an eye out. If we miss those dots, we’ll
end up in the grounds of the Fountain Blue in Miami.’

A quarter of an hour later, the tiny necklet of cays showed up. They
were barely above the water line. There was much shoal. It looked an
ideal hiding place for the plane. They came down to a hundred feet and
slowly cruised in a zigzag down the group. The water was so clear that
Bond could see big fish meandering around the dark clumps of coral and
seaweed in the brilliant sand. A big diamond-shaped stingray cowered and
buried itself in the sand as the black shadow of the plane pursued and
shot over it. There was nothing else and no possibility of concealment.
The green shoal waters were as clean and innocent as if they had been
open desert. The plane flew on south to North Bimini. Here there were a
few houses and some small fishing hotels. Expensive-looking deep-sea
fishing craft were out, their tall rods streaming. Gay people in the
well-decks waved to the little plane. A girl, sunbathing naked on the
roof of a smart cabin cruiser, hastily snatched at a towel. ‘Authentic
blonde!’ commented Leiter. They flew on south to the Cat Cays that trail
away south from the Biminis. Here there was still an occasional fishing
craft. Leiter groaned. ‘What the hell’s the good of this? These
fishermen would have found it by now if it was here.’ Bond told him to
keep on south. Thirty miles further south there were little unnamed
specks on the Admiralty chart. Soon the dark blue water began to shoal
again to green. They passed over three sharks circling aimlessly. Then
there was nothing—just dazzling sand under the glassy surface, and
occasional patches of coral.

They went on carefully down to where the water turned again to blue.
Leiter said dully, ‘Well, that’s that. Fifty miles on there’s Andros.
Too many people there. Someone would have heard the plane—if there was
a plane.’ He looked at his watch. ‘11.30. What next, Hawkshaw? I’ve only
got fuel for another two hours’ flying.’

Something was itching deep down in Bond’s mind. Something, some small
detail, had raised a tiny question-mark. What was it? Those sharks! In
about forty feet of water! Circling on the surface! What were they doing
there? Three of them. There must be something—something dead that had
brought them to that particular patch of sand and coral. Bond said
urgently, ‘Just go back up once more, Felix. Over the shoals. There’s
something—’

The little plane made a tight turn. Felix cut down the revs and just
kept flying speed about fifty feet above the surface. Bond opened the
door and craned out, his glasses at short focus. Yes, there were the
sharks, two on the surface with their dorsals out, and one deep down. It
was nosing at something. It had its teeth into something and was pulling
at it. Among the dark and pale patches, a thin straight line showed on
the bottom. Bond shouted, ‘Get back over again!’ The plane zoomed round
and back. Christ! Why did they have to go so fast? But now Bond had seen
another straight line on the bottom, leading off at 90 degrees from the
first. He flopped back into his seat and banged the door shut. He said
quietly, ‘Put her down over those sharks, Felix. I think this is it.’

Leiter took a quick glance at Bond’s face. He said, ‘Christ!’ Then,
‘Well, I hope I can make it. Damned difficult to get a true horizon.
This water’s like glass.’ He pulled away, curved back and slowly put the
nose down. There was a slight jerk and then the hiss of the water under
the skids. Leiter cut his engines and the plane came to a quick stop,
rocking in the water about ten yards from where Bond wanted. The two
sharks on the surface paid no attention. They completed their circle and
came slowly back. They passed so close to the plane that Bond could see
the incurious, pink button eyes. He peered down through the small
ripples cast by the two dorsal fins. Yes! Those ‘rocks’ on the bottom
were bogus. They were painted patches. So were the areas of ‘sand’. Now
Bond could clearly see the straight edges of the giant tarpaulin. The
third shark had nosed back a big section. Now it was shovelling with its
flat head trying to get underneath.

Bond sat back. He turned to Leiter. He nodded. ‘That’s it, all right.
Big camouflaged tarpaulin over her. Take a look.’

While Leiter leant across Bond and stared down, Bond’s mind was racing
furiously. Get the Police Commissioner on the police wavelength and
report? Get signals sent off to London? No! If the radio operator on the
_Disco_ was doing his job, he would be keeping watch on the police
frequency. So go on down and have a look. See if the bombs were still
there. Bring up a piece of evidence. The sharks? Kill one and the others
would go for the corpse.

Leiter sat back. His face shining with excitement. ‘Well, I’ll be
goddammed! Boy oh boy!’ He clapped Bond on the back. ‘We’ve found it!
We’ve found the goddam plane. Whaddya know? Jesus Kerist!’

Bond had taken out the Walther PPK. He checked to see there was a round
in the chamber, rested it on his left forearm and waited for the two
sharks to come round again. The first was the bigger, a hammerhead
nearly twelve feet long. Its hideously distorted head moved slowly from
side to side as it nuzzled through the water, watching what went on
below, waiting for the sign of meat. Bond aimed for the base of the
dorsal fin that cut through the water like a dark sail. It was fully
erect, a sign of tension and awareness in the big fish. Just below it
was the spine, unassailable except with a nickel-plated bullet. He
pulled the trigger. There was a phut as the bullet hit the surface just
behind the dorsal. The boom of the heavy gun rolled away over the sea.
The shark paid no attention. Bond fired again. The water foamed as the
fish reared itself above the surface, dived shallowly and came up
thrashing sideways like a broken snake. It was a brief flurry. The
bullet must have severed the spinal cord. Now the great brown shape
began moving sluggishly in circles that grew ever wider. The hideous
snout came briefly out of the water to show the sickle mouth gasping.
For a moment it rolled over on its back, its stomach white to the sun.
Then it righted itself and, dead probably, continued its mechanical,
disjointed swim.

The following shark had watched all this. Now it approached cautiously.
It made a short snapping run and swerved away. Feeling safe, it darted
in again, seemed to nuzzle at the dying fish and then lifted its snout
above the surface and came down with all its force, scything into the
flank of the hammerhead. It got hold, but the flesh was tough. It shook
its great brown head like a dog, worrying at the mouthful, and then tore
itself away. A cloud of blood poured over the sea. Now the other shark
appeared from below and both fish, in a frenzy, tore and tore again at
the still moving hulk whose nervous system refused to die.

The dreadful feast moved away on the current and was soon only a distant
splashing on the surface of the quiet sea.

Bond handed Leiter the gun. ‘I’ll get on down. May be rather a long job.
They’ve got enough to keep them busy for half an hour, but if they come
back, wing one of them. And if for any reason you want me back on the
surface, fire straight down at the water and go on firing. The
shock-wave should just about reach me.’

Bond began to struggle out of his clothes and, with Leiter’s help, into
his aqualung. It was a cramped, difficult business. It would be still
worse getting back into the plane and it occurred to Bond that he would
have to jettison the underwater gear. Leiter said angrily, ‘I wish to
God I could get down there with you. Trouble with this damned hook, it
just won’t swim like a hand. Have to think up some rubber webbing
gadget. Never occurred to me before.’

Bond said, ‘You’ll have to keep steam up on this crate. We’ve already
drifted a hundred yards. Get her back up, like a good chap. I don’t know
who I’m going to find sharing the wreck with me. It’s been here a good
five days and other visitors may have moved in first.’

Leiter pressed the starter and taxi’d back into position. He said, ‘You
know the design of the Vindicator? You know where to look for the bombs
and these detonator things the pilot has charge of?’

‘Yes. Full briefing in London. Well, so long. Tell Mother I died game!’
Bond scrambled on to the edge of the cockpit and jumped.

He got his head under and swam leisurely down through the brilliant
water. Now he could see that there were swarms of fish over the whole
area below him—bill fish, small barracuda, jacks of various types—the
carnivores. They parted grudgingly to make room for their big, pale
competitor. Bond touched down and made for the edge of the tarpaulin
that had been dislodged by the shark. He pulled out a couple of the long
corkscrew skewers that secured it to the sand, switched on his
waterproof torch and, his other hand on his knife, slipped under the
edge.

He had been expecting it, but the foulness of the water made him retch.
He clamped his lips more tightly round the mouthpiece and squirmed on to
where the bulk of the plane raised the tarpaulin into a domed tent. He
stood up. His torch glittered on the underside of a polished wing and
then, below it, on to something that lay under a scrabbling mass of
crabs, langoustes, sea-caterpillars and starfish. This also Bond had
been prepared for. He knelt down to his grisly work.

It didn’t take long. He unclipped the gold identification disc and
unlatched the gold wrist-watch from the horrible wrists and noted the
gaping wound under the chin that could not have been caused by sea
creatures. He turned his torch on the gold disc. It said ‘Giuseppe
Petacchi. No 15932’. He strapped the two bits of evidence to his own
wrists and went on towards the fuselage that loomed in the darkness like
a huge silver submarine. He inspected the exterior, noted the rent where
the hull had been broken on impact, and then climbed up through the open
safety hatch into the interior.

Inside, Bond’s torch shone everywhere into red eyes that glowed like
rubies in the darkness and there was a soft movement and a scuttling. He
sprayed the light up and down the fuselage. Everywhere there were
octopuses, small ones, but perhaps a hundred of them, weaving on the
tips of their tentacles, sliding softly away into protecting shadows,
changing their camouflage nervously from brown to a pale phosphorescence
that gleamed palely in the patches of darkness. The whole fuselage
seemed to be crawling with them, evilly, horribly, and as Bond shone his
torch on the roof the sight was even worse. There, bumping softly in the
slight current, hung the corpse of a crew member. In decomposition, it
had risen up from the floor, and octopuses, hanging from it like bats,
now let go their hold and shot, jet propelled, to and fro inside the
plane—dreadful, glinting, red-eyed comets that slapped themselves into
dark corners and stealthily squeezed themselves into cracks and under
seats.

Bond closed his mind to the disgusting nightmare and, weaving his torch
in front of him, proceeded with his search.

He found the red-striped cyanide canister and tucked it into his belt.
He counted the corpses, noted the open hatch to the bomb bay and
verified that the bombs had gone. He looked in the open container under
the pilot’s seat and searched in alternative places for the vital fuses
for the bombs. But they also had gone. Finally, having a dozen times had
to slash away groping tentacles from his naked legs, he felt his nerve
was quickly seeping away. There was much he should have taken with him,
the identification discs of the crew, the pulp of the log book that
showed nothing but routine flight details and no hint of emergency,
readings from the instrument panel, but he couldn’t stand another second
of the squirming, red-eyed catacomb. He slid out through the escape
hatch and swam almost hysterically towards the thin line of light that
was the edge of the tarpaulin. Desperately, he scrabbled his way under
it, snagged the cylinder on his back in the folds and had to back under
again to free himself. And then he was out in the beautiful crystal
water and soaring up to the surface. At twenty feet the pain in his ears
reminded him to stop and decompress. Impatiently, staring up at the
sweet hull of the seaplane above him, he waited until the pain had
subsided. Then he was up and clinging to a float and tearing at his
equipment to get rid of it and its contamination. He let it all go and
watched it tumbling slowly down towards the sand. He rinsed his mouth
out with the sweetness of pure salt water and swam to within reach of
Leiter’s outstretched hand.




                                   18


                          _How to Eat a Girl_

As they approached Nassau on their way back, Bond asked Leiter to take a
look at the _Disco_ lying off Palmyra. She was there all right, just
where she had been the day before. The only difference, which had little
meaning, was that she had only her bow anchor out. There was no movement
on board. Bond was thinking that she looked beautiful and quite harmless
lying there reflecting her elegant lines in the mirror of the sea, when
Leiter said excitedly, ‘Say, James, take a look at the beach place. The
boathouse alongside the creek. See those double tracks leading up out of
the water? Up to the door of the boathouse. They look odd to me. They’re
deep. What could have made them?’

Bond focused his glasses. The tracks ran parallel. Something, something
heavy, had been hauled between the boathouse and the sea. But it
couldn’t be, surely it couldn’t! He said tensely, ‘Let’s get away quick,
Felix.’ Then, as they zoomed off overland, ‘I’m damned if I can think of
anything that could have made those. And dammit, if it was what it might
have been, they’d have swept off those tracks pretty quick.’

Leiter said laconically, ‘People make mistakes. We’ll have to give that
place the going over. Ought to have done it before. Nice looking dump. I
think I’ll take Mr Largo up on his invitation and get out there on
behalf of my esteemed client, Mr Rockefeller Bond.’

It was one o’clock by the time they got back to Windsor Field. For half
an hour the control tower had been searching for them on the radio. Now
they had to face the commandant of the field and, providentially as it
happened, the Governor’s ADC, who gave the Governor’s blanket
authorization for the string of their misdemeanours and then handed Bond
a thick envelope which contained signals for both of them.

The contents began with the expected rockets for breaking communication
and demands for further news (‘That they’ll get!’ commented Leiter as
they raced towards Nassau in the comfortable back of the Governor’s
Humber Snipe saloon.) ETA for the _Manta_ was five o’clock that evening.
Inquiries through Interpol and the Italian police confirmed that
Giuseppe Petacchi was in fact the brother of Dominetta Vitali, whose
personal history as given to Bond stood up in all other respects. The
same sources confirmed that Emilio Largo was a big-time adventurer and
suspected crook though technically his dossier was clean. The source of
his wealth was unknown but did not stem from funds held in Italy. The
_Disco_ had been paid for in Swiss francs. The constructors confirmed
the existence of the underwater compartment. It contained an electric
hoist and provision for launching small underwater craft and releasing
skin-divers. In Largo’s specifications, this modification to the hull
had been given as a requirement for underwater research. Further inquiry
into the ‘shareholders’ had yielded no further facts—with the
significant exception that most of their backgrounds and professions
dated back no further than six years. This suggested the possibility
that their identities might be of recent fabrication and, at any rate in
theory, this would equate with possible membership of SPECTRE, if such a
body did in fact exist. Kotze had left Switzerland for an unknown
destination four weeks previously. Latest photographs of the man were on
the midday Pan American plane. Nevertheless the Thunderball war-room had
to accept the solidity of Largo’s cover unless further evidence came to
hand, and the present intention was to continue the world-wide search
while allotting priority to the Bahamas area. In view of this priority,
and the extremely urgent time factor, Brigadier Fairchild, CB, DSO,
British Military Attaché in Washington, with Rear Admiral Carlson, USN
Ret., until recently Secretary to the US Chiefs of Staff Committee,
would be arriving at 1900 EST by the President’s Boeing 707,
‘Columbine’, to take joint command of further operations. The full
co-operation of Messrs Bond and Leiter was requested and, until the
arrival of above named officers, full reports every hour on the hour
were to be radio’d to London, copy to Washington, under joint signature.

Leiter and Bond looked at each other in silence. Finally Leiter said,
‘James, I propose we disregard the last bit and take formal note of the
remainder. We’ve already missed four hours and I don’t propose we spend
the rest of the day sweating it out in our radio room. There’s just too
much to do. Tell you what. I’ll do the stint of telling them the latest
and then I’ll say we’re going off the air in view of the new emergency.
I then propose to go and look over Palmyra on your behalf, sticking to
our cover story. And I propose to have a damned good look at the
boathouse and see what those tracks mean. Right? Then, at five, we’ll
rendezvous with the _Manta_ and prepare to intercept the _Disco_ if and
when she sails. As for the Big Brass in the President’s Special, well
they can just play pinocle in Government House until tomorrow morning.
Tonight’s the night and we just can’t waste it on the “After you
Alphonse” routine. Okay?’

Bond reflected. They were coming in to the outskirts of Nassau, through
the shanty-town slums tucked away behind the millionaire facade along
the waterfront. He had disobeyed many orders in his life, but this was
to disobey the Prime Minister of England and the President of the United
States—a mighty left and right. But things were moving a damned sight
too fast. M had given him this territory and, right or wrong, M would
back him up, as he always backed up his staff, even if it meant M’s own
head on a charger. Bond said, ‘I agree, Felix. With the _Manta_ we can
manage this on our own. The vital thing is to find out when those bombs
go on board the _Disco_. I’ve got an idea for that. May work, may not.
It means giving the Vitali girl a rough time, but I’ll try and handle
that side. Drop me at the hotel and I’ll get cracking. Meet you here
again around four thirty. I’ll call up Harling and see if he’s got
anything new on the _Disco_ and ask him to pass the word upstairs to you
if anything’s cooking. You’ve got all that straight about the plane?
Okay. I’ll hang on to Petacchi’s identification disc for the time being.
Be seeing you.’

Bond almost ran through the lobby of the hotel. When he picked up his
key at the reception desk they gave him a telephone message. He read it
going up in the lift. It was from Domino: ‘Please telephone quickly.’

In his room, Bond first ordered a club sandwich and a double Bourbon on
the rocks and then called the Police Commissioner. The _Disco_ had moved
to the oiling wharf at first light and had filled her tanks. Then she
had moved back to her anchorage off Palmyra. Half an hour ago, at one
thirty precisely, the seaplane had been lowered over the side and, with
Largo and one other on board, had taken off eastwards. When the
Commissioner had heard this on the walkie-talkie from his watchers he
had got on to the control tower at Windsor Field and had asked for the
plane to be radar-tracked. But she had flown low, at about 300 feet, and
they had lost her among the islands about fifty miles to the south-east.
Nothing else had come up except that the harbour authorities had been
alerted to expect an American submarine, the _Manta_, the
nuclear-powered one, at around five in the evening. That was all. What
did Bond know?

Bond said carefully that it was too early to tell. It looked as if the
operation was hotting up. Could the watchers be asked to rush the news
back as soon as the seaplane was sighted coming back to the _Disco_?
This was vital. Would the Commissioner please pass on his news to Felix
Leiter who was on his way to the radio room at that moment? And could
Bond be lent a car—anything—to drive himself? Yes, a Land Rover would
be fine. Anything with four wheels.

Then Bond got on to Domino out at Palmyra. She sounded eager for his
voice. ‘Where have you been all morning, James?’—it was the first time
she had used his Christian name—‘I want you to come swimming this
afternoon. I have been told to pack and come on board this evening.
Emilio says they are going after the treasure tonight. Isn’t it nice of
him to take me? But it’s a dead secret, so don’t tell anyone, will you.
But he is vague about when we will be back. He said something about
Miami. I thought—’ she hesitated—‘I thought you might have gone back
to New York by the time we get back. I have seen so little of you. You
left so suddenly last night. What was it?’

‘I suddenly got a headache. Touch of the sun I suppose. It had been
quite a day. I didn’t want to go. And I’d love to come for a swim.
Where?’

She gave him careful directions. It was a beach a mile further along the
coast from Palmyra. There was a side road and a thatched hut. He
couldn’t miss it. The beach was sort of better than Palmyra’s. The
skin-diving was more fun. And of course there weren’t so many people. It
belonged to some Swedish millionaire who had gone away. When could he
get there? Half an hour would be all right. They would have more time.
On the reef that is.

Bond’s drink came and the sandwich. He sat and consumed them, looking at
the wall, feeling excited about the girl, but knowing what he was going
to do to her life that afternoon. It was going to be a bad
business—when it could have been so good. He remembered her as he had
first seen her, the ridiculous straw hat tilted down over the nose, the
pale blue ribbons flying as she sped up Bay Street. Oh well . . .

Bond rolled his swimming trunks into a towel, put on a dark blue
sea-island cotton shirt over his slacks and slung Leiter’s Geiger
counter over his shoulder. He glanced at himself in the mirror. He
looked like any other tourist with a camera. He felt in his trousers
pocket to make sure he had the identification bracelet and went out of
the room and down in the lift.

The Land Rover had Dunlopillo cushions, but the ripple-edged tarmac and
the pitted bends of Nassau’s coastal road were tough on the springs and
the quivering afternoon sun was a killer. By the time Bond found the
sandy track leading off into the casuarinas and had parked the car on
the edge of the beach, all he wanted to do was get into the sea and stay
in it. The beach hut was a Robinson Crusoe affair of plaited bamboo and
screwpine with a palm thatch whose wide eaves threw black shadows.
Inside were two changing rooms labelled ‘HIS’ and ‘HERS’. Hers contained
a small pile of soft clothes and the white doeskin sandals. Bond changed
and walked out again into the sun. The small beach was a dazzling
half-moon of white sand enclosed on both sides by rocky points. There
was no sign of the girl. The beach shelved quickly through green to blue
under the water. Bond took a few steps through the shallows and dived
through the blood-warm upper water down into the cool depths. He kept
down there as long as possible, feeling the wonderful cold caress on his
skin and through his hair. Then he surfaced and crawled lazily out to
sea, expecting to see the girl skin-diving round one of the headlands.
But there was no sign of her, and after ten minutes Bond turned back to
the shore, chose a patch of firm sand, and lay down on his stomach, his
face cradled in his arms.

Minutes later, something made Bond open his eyes. Coming towards him
across the middle of the quiet bay was a thin trail of bubbles. When it
passed over the dark blue into the green, Bond could see the yellow
single cylinder of the aqualung tank and the glint of a mask with a fan
of dark hair streaming out behind. The girl beached herself in the
shallows. She raised herself on one elbow and lifted the mask. She said
severely, ‘Don’t lie there dreaming. Come and rescue me.’

Bond got to his feet and walked the few steps to where she lay. He said,
‘You oughtn’t to aqualung by yourself. What’s happened? Has a shark been
lunching off you?’

‘Don’t make silly jokes. I’ve got some sea-egg spines in my foot. You’ll
have to get them out somehow. First of all get this aqualung off me. It
hurts too much to stand on my foot with all this weight.’ She reached
for the buckle at her stomach and released the catch. ‘Now just lift it
off.’

Bond did as he was told and carried the cylinder up into the shade of
the trees. Now she was sitting in the shallow water inspecting the sole
of her right foot. She said. ‘There are only two of them. They’re going
to be difficult.’

Bond came and knelt beside her. The two black spots, close together,
were almost under the curl of the middle toes. He got up and held out a
hand. ‘Come on. We’ll get into the shade. This is going to take time.
Don’t put your foot down or you’ll push them in further. I’ll carry
you.’

She laughed up at him. ‘My hero! All right. But don’t drop me.’ She held
up both arms. Bond reached down and put one arm under her knees and
another under her armpits. Her arms closed round his neck. Bond picked
her up easily. He stood for a moment in the lapping water and looked
down into her upturned face. The bright eyes said yes. He bent his head
and kissed her hard on the half-open, waiting mouth.

The soft lips held his and drew slowly away. She said rather
breathlessly, ‘You shouldn’t take your reward in advance.’

‘That was only on account.’ Bond closed his hand firmly over her right
breast and walked out of the water and up to the beach into the shade of
the casuarinas. He laid her gently down in the soft sand. She put her
hands behind her head to keep the sand out of her straggling hair and
lay waiting, her eyes half hidden behind the dark mesh of her eyelashes.

The mounded vee of the bikini looked up at Bond and the proud breasts in
the tight cups were two more eyes. Bond felt his control going. He said
roughly, ‘Turn over.’

She did as she was told. Bond knelt down and picked up her right foot.
It felt small and soft, like a captured bird, in his hand. He wiped away
the specks of sand and uncurled the toes. The small pink pads were like
the buds of some multiple flower. Holding them back, he bent and put his
lips to where the broken ends of the black spines showed. He sucked hard
for about a minute. A small piece of grit from one of the spines came
into his mouth and he spat it out. He said. ‘This is going to be a long
business unless I hurt a bit. Otherwise it’ll take all day and I can’t
waste too much time over just one foot. Ready?’

He saw the muscles of her behind clench to take the pain. She said
dreamily, ‘Yes.’

Bond sunk his teeth into the flesh round the spines, bit as softly as he
could and sucked hard. The foot struggled to get away. Bond paused to
spit out some fragments. The marks of his teeth showed white and there
were pinpoints of blood at the two tiny holes. He licked them away.
There was almost no black left under the skin. He said, ‘This is the
first time I’ve eaten a woman. They’re rather good.’

She squirmed impatiently but said nothing.

Bond knew how much it would be hurting. He said, ‘It’s all right,
Domino. You’re doing fine. Last mouthful.’ He gave the sole of her foot
a reassuring kiss and then, as tenderly as he could, put his teeth and
lips back to work.

A minute or two later and he spat out the last section of spine. He told
her it was over and gently laid the foot down. He said, ‘Now you mustn’t
get sand into it. Come on, I’ll give you another lift into the hut and
you can put your sandals on.’

She rolled over. Her black eyelashes were wet with the tears of small
pain. She wiped a hand over them. She said, looking seriously up at him,
‘Do you know, you’re the first man who’s ever made me cry.’ She held up
her arms and now there was complete surrender.

Bond bent and picked her up. This time he didn’t kiss the waiting mouth.
He carried her to the door of the hut. HIS or HERS? He carried her into
HIS. He reached out a hand for shirt and shorts and threw them down to
make a scrap of a bed. He put her down softly so that she was standing
on his shirt. She kept her arms round his neck while he undid the single
button of the brassiere and then the tapes of the taut slip. He stepped
out of his bathing trunks and kicked them away.




                                   19


                       _When the Kissing Stopped_

Bond leant on one elbow and looked down at the beautiful drowned face.
There was a dew of sweat below the eyes and at the temples. A pulse beat
fast at the base of the neck. The lines of authority had been sponged
away by the lovemaking and the face had a soft, sweet, bruised look. The
wet eyelashes parted and the tawny eyes, big and faraway, looked up with
remote curiosity into Bond’s. They focused lazily and examined him as if
they were seeing him for the first time.

Bond said, ‘I’m sorry. I shouldn’t have done that.’

The words amused her. The dimples at each side of the mouth deepened
into clefts. She said, ‘You talk like a girl who has had it for the
first time. Now you are frightened that you will have a baby. You will
have to tell your mother.’

Bond leant down and kissed her. He kissed the two corners of her mouth
and then the parted lips. He said, ‘Come and swim. Then I must talk to
you.’ He got to his feet and held out his hands. Reluctantly she took
them. He pulled her up and against him. Her body flirted with his,
knowing it was safe. She smiled impishly up at him and became more
wanton. Bond crushed her fiercely to him, to stop her and because he
knew they had only a few more minutes of happiness. He said, ‘Stop it,
Domino. And come on. We don’t need any clothes. The sand won’t hurt your
foot. I was only pretending.’

She said, ‘So was I when I came out of the sea. The spines didn’t hurt
all that much. And I could have cured them if I’d wanted to. Like the
fishermen do. You know how?’

Bond laughed. ‘Yes I do. Now, into the sea.’ He kissed her once and
stood back and looked at her body to remember how it had been. Then he
turned abruptly and ran to the sea and dived deeply down.

When he got back to shore she was already out and dressing. Bond dried
himself. He answered her laughing remarks through the partition with
monosyllables. Finally she accepted the change in him. She said, ‘What
is the matter with you, James? Is anything wrong?’

‘Yes, darling.’ Pulling on his trousers Bond heard the rattle of the
little gold chain against the coins in his pocket. He said, ‘Come
outside. I’ve got to talk to you.’

Sentimentally, Bond chose a patch of sand on the other side of the hut
from where they had been before. She came out and stood in front of him.
She examined his face carefully, trying to read it. Bond avoided her
eyes. He sat with his arms round his knees and looked out to sea. She
sat down beside him, but not close. She said, ‘You are going to hurt me.
Is it that you too are going away? Be quick. Do it cleanly and I will
not cry.’

Bond said, ‘I’m afraid it’s worse than that, Domino. It’s not about me.
It’s about your brother.’

Bond sensed the stiffening of her body. She said in a low, tense voice,
‘Go on. Tell me.’

Bond took the bracelet out of his pocket and silently handed it to her.

She took it. She hardly gave it a glance. She turned a little away from
Bond. ‘So he is dead. What happened to him?’

‘It is a bad story, and a very big one. It involves your friend Largo.
It is a very great conspiracy. I am here to find out things for my
government. I am really a kind of policeman. I am telling you this and I
will tell you the rest because hundreds and perhaps thousands of people
will die unless you help to prevent it. That is why I had to show you
that bracelet and hurt you so that you would believe me. I am breaking
my oath in doing this. Whatever happens, whatever you decide to do, I
trust you not to tell what I am going to say.’

‘So that is why you made love to me—to make me do what you want. And
now you blackmail me with the death of my brother.’ The words came out
between her teeth. Now in a soft, deadly whisper, she said, ‘I hate you,
I hate you, I hate you.’

Bond said coldly, in a matter-of-fact voice, ‘Your brother was killed by
Largo, or on his orders. I came here to tell you that. But then,’ he
hesitated, ‘you were there and I love you and want you. When what
happened began to happen I should have had strength to stop it. I
hadn’t. I knew it was then or perhaps never. Knowing what I knew, it was
a dreadful thing to have done. But you looked so beautiful and happy. I
wanted to put off hurting you. That is my only excuse.’ Bond paused.
‘Now listen to what I have to tell you. Try and forget about your hate
for me. In a moment you will realize that we are nothing in all this.
This is a thing by itself.’ Bond didn’t wait for her to comment. He
began from the beginning and went slowly, minutely, through the whole
case, omitting only the advent of the _Manta_, the one factor that could
now be of help to Largo and perhaps alter his plans. He ended, ‘So you
see, there is nothing we can do until those weapons are actually on
board the _Disco_. Until that moment comes, Largo has a perfect alibi
with his treasure hunt story. There is nothing to link him with the
crashed plane or with SPECTRE. If we interfere with him now, this
moment, arrest the ship on some excuse, put a watch on her, prevent her
sailing, there will only be a delay in the SPECTRE plan. Only Largo and
his men know where the bombs are hidden. If the plane has gone for them,
it will be keeping contact with the _Disco_ by radio. If there’s any
hitch, the plane can leave the bombs at the hiding place or at another,
dump them in shallow water anywhere, and return for them when the
trouble has blown over. Even the _Disco_ could be taken off the job and
some other ship or plane used any time in the future. SPECTRE
headquarters, wherever they are, will inform the Prime Minister that
there has been a change of plan, or they can say nothing at all. Then,
perhaps weeks from now, they will send another communication. And this
time there will perhaps be only twenty-four hours’ notice for the money
to be dropped. The terms will be tougher. And we shall have to accept
them. So long as those bombs are still lost to us, the threat is there.
You see that?’

‘Yes. So what is to be done?’ The voice was harsh. The girl’s eyes
glittered fiercely as they looked at and through Bond towards some
distant target—not, he thought, at Largo the great conspirator, but at
Largo who had had her brother killed.

‘We have got to know when those bombs are on board the _Disco_. That is
all that matters. Then we can act with all our weight. And we have one
great factor on our side. We are pretty sure that Largo feels secure. He
still believes that the wonderful plan, and it is wonderful, is going
exactly as it was meant to do. That is our strength and our only
strength. You see that?’

‘And how are you to know when the bombs come on board the yacht?’

‘You must tell us.’

‘Yes.’ The monosyllable was dull, indifferent. ‘But how am I to know?
And how am I to tell you? This man is no fool. He is only foolish in
wanting his mistress’—she spat the word out—‘when so much else is at
stake.’ She paused. ‘These people have chosen badly. Largo cannot live
without a woman within reach. They should have known that.’

‘When did Largo tell you to come back on board?’

‘Five. The boat is coming to fetch me at Palmyra.’

Bond looked at his watch. ‘It is now four. I have this Geiger counter.
It is simple to use. It will tell at once if the bombs are on board. I
want you to take it with you. If it says there is a bomb on board, I
want you to show a light at your porthole—switch the lights on in your
cabin several times, anything like that. We have men watching the ship.
They will be told to report. Then get rid of the Geiger counter. Drop it
overboard.’

She said scornfully, ‘That is a silly plan. It is the sort of
melodramatic nonsense people write about in thrillers. In real life
people don’t go into their cabins and switch on their lights in
daylight. No. If the bombs are there, I will come up on deck—show
myself to your men. That is natural behaviour. If they are not there, I
will stay in my cabin.’

‘All right. Have it your own way. But will you do this?’

‘Of course. If I can prevent myself killing Largo when I see him. But on
condition that when you get him you will see that he is killed.’ She was
entirely serious. She looked at him with matter-of-fact eyes as if he
was a travel agent and she was reserving a seat on a train.

‘I doubt if that will happen. I should say that every man on board will
get a life sentence in prison.’

She considered this. ‘Yes. That will do. That is worse than being
killed. Now show me how this machine works.’ She got to her feet and
took a couple of steps up the beach. She seemed to remember something.
She looked down at the bracelet in her hand. She turned and walked down
to the edge of the sea and stood for a moment looking out across the
quiet water. She said some words that Bond couldn’t hear. Then she leant
back and with all her strength threw the gold chain far out over the
shoal into the dark blue. The chain twinkled briefly in the strong sun
and there was a small splash. She watched the ripples widen and, when
the smashed mirror was whole again, turned and walked back up the sand,
her small limp leaving footmarks of uneven depth.

Bond showed her the working of the machine. He eliminated the
wrist-watch indicator and told her to depend entirely on the telltale
clicking. ‘Anywhere in the ship should be all right,’ he explained. ‘But
better near the hold if you can get there. Say you want to take a
photograph from the well-deck aft or something. This thing’s made up to
look like a Rolleiflex. It’s got all the Rolleiflex lenses and gadgets
on the front, lever to press and all. It just hasn’t got a film. You
could say that you’d decided to take some farewell pictures of Nassau
and the yacht, couldn’t you?’

‘Yes.’ The girl, who had been listening attentively, now seemed
distracted. Tentatively she put out a hand and touched Bond’s arm. She
let the hand fall. She looked up at him and then swiftly away. She said
shyly, ‘What I said, what I said about hating you. That is not true. I
didn’t understand. How could I—all this terrible story? I still can’t
quite believe it, believe that Largo has anything to do with it. We had
a sort of an affair in Capri. He is an attractive man. Everyone else
wanted him. It was a challenge to take him from all these other smart
women. Then he explained about the yacht and this wonderful trip looking
for treasure. It was like a fairy tale. Of course I agreed to come. Who
wouldn’t have? In exchange, I was quite ready to do what I had to do.’
She looked briefly at him and away. ‘I am sorry. But that is how it is.
When we got to Nassau and he kept me ashore, away from the yacht, I was
surprised but I was not offended. The islands are beautiful. There was
enough for me to do. But what you have told me explains many small
things. I was never allowed in the radio room. The crew were silent and
unfriendly—they treated me like someone who was not wanted on board,
and they were on curious terms with Largo, more like equals than paid
men. And they were tough men and better educated than sailors usually
are. So it all fits. I can even remember that, for a whole week before
last Thursday, Largo was terribly nervous and irritable. We were already
getting tired of each other. I put it down to that. I was even making
plans for flying home by myself. But he has been better the last few
days and when he told me to be packed and ready to come on board this
evening, I thought I might just as well do as he said. And of course I
was very excited over this treasure hunt. I wanted to see what it was
all about. But then,’ she looked out to sea, ‘there was you. And this
afternoon, after what happened, I had decided to tell Largo I would not
go. I would stay here and see where you went and go with you.’ For the
first time she looked him full in the face and held his eyes. ‘Would you
have let me do that?’

Bond reached out and put his hand against her cheek. ‘Of course I
would.’

‘But what happens now? When shall I see you again?’

This was the question Bond had dreaded. By sending her back on board,
and with the Geiger counter, he was putting her in double danger. She
could be found out by Largo, in which case her death would be immediate.
If it came to a chase, which seemed almost certain, the _Manta_ would
sink the _Disco_ by gunfire or torpedo, probably without warning. Bond
had added up these factors and had closed his mind to them. He kept it
closed. He said, ‘As soon as this is over. I shall look for you wherever
you are. But now you are going to be in danger. You know this. Do you
want to go on with it?’

She looked at her watch. She said, ‘It is half past four. I must go. Do
not come with me to the car. Kiss me once and stay here. Do not worry
about what you want done. I will do it well. It is either that or a
stiletto in the back for this man.’ She held out her arms. ‘Come.’

Minutes later Bond heard the engine of the MG come to life. He waited
until the sound had receded in the distance down the Western Coast Road,
then he went to the Land Rover and climbed in and followed.

A mile down the coast, at the two white obelisks that marked the
entrance to Palmyra, dust still hung in the driveway. Bond sneered at
his impulse to drive in after her and stop her from going out to the
yacht. What in hell was he thinking of? He drove on fast down the road
to Old Fort Point, where the police watchers were housed in the garage
of a deserted villa. They were there, one man reading a paperback in a
canvas chair while the other sat before tripod binoculars that were
trained on the _Disco_ through a gap in the blinds of a side window. The
khaki walkie-talkie set was beside them on the floor. Bond gave them the
new briefing and got on the radio to the Police Commissioner and
confirmed it to him. The Commissioner passed two messages to him from
Leiter. One was to the effect that the visit to Palmyra had been
negative except that a servant had said the girl’s baggage had gone on
board the _Disco_ that afternoon. The boathouse was completely innocent.
It contained a glass-bottomed boat and a pedallo. The pedallo would have
made the tracks they had seen from the air. The second message said that
the _Manta_ was expected in twenty minutes. Would Bond meet Leiter at
the Prince George Wharf, where she would dock.

                                   ★

The _Manta_, coming with infinite caution up-channel, had none of the
greyhound elegance of the conventional submarine. She was blunt and
thick and ugly. The bulbous metal cucumber, her rounded nose shrouded
with tarpaulin to hide the secrets of her radar scanner from the
Nassavians, held no suggestion of her speed, which Leiter said was
around forty knots submerged. ‘But they won’t tell you that, James.
That’s Classified. I guess we’re going to find that even the paper in
the can is Classified when we go aboard. Watch out for these Navy guys.
Nowadays they’re so tight-lipped they think even a belch is a security
risk.’

‘What else do you know about her?’

‘Well, we won’t tell this to the captain, but of course in CIA we had to
be taught the basic things about these atom subs, so as we could brief
agents on what to look for and recognize clues in their reports. She’s
one of the George Washington Class, about 4,000 tons, crew of around a
hundred, cost about a hundred million dollars. Range, anything you want
until the chow runs out or until the nuclear reactor needs topping
up—say every 100,000 miles or so. If she has the same armament as the
George Washington, she’ll have sixteen vertical launching tubes, two
banks of eight, for the Polaris solid fuel missile. These have a range
of around 1,200 miles. The crews call the tubes “the Sherwood Forest”
because they’re painted green and the missile compartment looks like
rows of great big tree trunks. These Polaris jobs are fired from way
down below the surface. The sub stops and holds dead steady. They have
the ship’s exact position at all times through radio fixes and star
sights through a tricky affair called a star-tracker periscope. All this
dope is fed into the missiles automatically. Then the chief gunner
presses a button and a missile shoots up through the water by compressed
air. When it breaks surface the solid fuel rockets ignite and take the
missile the rest of the way. Hell of a weapon really when you come to
think of it. Imagine these damned things shooting up out of the sea
anywhere in the world and blowing some capital city to smithereens.
We’ve got six of them already and we’re going to have more. Good
deterrent when you come to think of it. You don’t know where they are or
when. Not like bomber bases and firing pads and so on you can track down
and put out of action with your first rocket wave.’

Bond commented drily, ‘They’ll find some way of spotting them. And
presumably an atomic depth charge set deep would send a shock-wave
through hundreds of miles of water and blow anything to pieces over a
huge area. But has she got anything smaller than these missiles? If
we’re going to do a job on the _Disco_ what are we going to use?’

‘She’s got six torpedo tubes up front and I dare say she’s got some
smaller stuff—machine-guns and so forth. The trouble’s going to be to
get the commander to fire them. He’s not going to like firing on an
unarmed civilian yacht on the orders of a couple of plain-clothes guys,
and one of them a Limey at that. Hope his orders from the Navy
Department are as solid as mine and yours.’

The huge submarine bumped gently against the wharf. Lines were thrown
and an aluminium gangplank was run ashore. There was a ragged cheer from
the crowd of watchers being held back by a cordon of police. Leiter
said, ‘Well, here we go. And to one hell of a bad start. Not a hat
between us to salute the quarter deck with. You curtsy, I’ll bow.’




                                   20


                          _Time for Decision_

The interior of the submarine was incredibly roomy, and it was stairs
and not a ladder that led down into the interior. There was no clutter,
and the sparkling paintwork was in two-tone green. Powerlines painted in
vivid colours provided a cheerful contrast to the almost hospital décor.
Preceded by the officer of the watch, a young man of about twenty-eight,
they went down two decks. The air (70° with 46% humidity, explained the
officer) was beautifully cool. At the bottom of the stairs he turned
left and knocked on a door that said ‘Commander P. Pedersen, USN.’

The captain looked about forty. He had a square, rather Scandinavian
face with a black crew-cut just going grey. He had shrewd, humorous eyes
but a dangerous mouth and jaw. He was sitting behind a neatly stacked
metal desk smoking a pipe. There was an empty coffee cup in front of him
and a signal pad on which he had just been writing. He got up and shook
hands, waved them to two chairs in front of his desk and said to the
officer of the watch, ‘Coffee, please, Stanton, and have this sent,
would you?’ He tore the top sheet off the signal pad and handed it
across. ‘Most Immediate.’

He sat down. ‘Well gentlemen. Welcome aboard. Commander Bond, it’s a
pleasure to have a member of the Royal Navy visit the ship. Ever been in
subs before?’

‘I have,’ said Bond, ‘but only as a supercargo. I was in
intelligence—RNVR Special Branch. Strictly a chocolate sailor.’

The captain laughed. ‘That’s good! And you, Mr Leiter?’

‘No, Captain. But I used to have one of my own. You operated it with a
sort of rubber bulb and tube. Trouble was they’d never let me have
enough depth of water in the bath to see what she could really do.’

‘Sounds rather like the Navy Department. They’ll never let me try this
ship full out. Except once on trials. Every time you want to get going,
the needle comes across a damn red line some interfering so-and-so has
painted on the dial. Well, gentlemen,’ the captain looked at Leiter,
‘what’s the score? Haven’t had such a flood of Top Secret Most
Immediates since Korea. I don’t mind telling you, the last one was from
the Chief of the Navy, Personal. Said I was to consider myself under
your orders, or, on your death or incapacity, under Commander Bond’s,
until Admiral Carlson arrives at 1900 this evening. So what? What’s
cooking? All I know is that all signals have been prefixed Operation
Thunderball. What is this operation?’

Bond had greatly taken to Commander Pedersen. He liked his ease and
humour and, in general—the old navy phrase came back to him—the cut of
his jib. Now he watched the stolid good-humoured face as Leiter told his
story down to the departure of Largo’s amphibian at 1.30 and the
instructions Bond had given to Domino Vitali.

In the background to Leiter’s voice there was a medley of soft
noises—the high, constant whine of a generator overlaid by the muted
background of canned music—the Ink Spots singing ‘I love coffee, I love
tea’. Occasionally the PA System above the captain’s desk crackled and
sang with operational double-talk—‘Roberts to Chief of the
Boat’—‘Chief Engineer wants Oppenshaw’—‘Team Blue to Compartment
F’—and from somewhere came the suck and gurgle of a pumplike apparatus
that sounded punctually every two minutes. It was like being inside the
simple brain of a robot that worked by hydraulics and electrical
impulses with a few promptings from its human masters.

After ten minutes, Commander Pedersen sat back. He reached for his pipe
and began filling it absentmindedly. He said, ‘Well, that’s one hell of
a story.’ He smiled. ‘And strangely enough, even if I hadn’t had these
signals from the Navy Department, I’d believe it. Always did think
something like this would happen one of these days. Hell! I have to
carry these missiles around, and I’m in command of a nuclear ship. But
that doesn’t mean that I’m not terrified by the whole business. Got a
wife and two children, and that doesn’t help either. These atomic
weapons are just too damned dangerous. Why, any one of these little
sandy cays around here could hold the whole of the United States to
ransom—just with one of my missiles trained on Miami. And here am I,
fellow called Peter Pedersen, age thirty-eight, maybe sane or maybe not,
toting around sixteen of the things—enough to damn near wipe out
England. However,’ he put his hands down on the desk in front of him,
‘that’s all by the way. Now we’ve got just one small piece of the
problem on our hands—small, but as big as the world. So what are we to
do? As I see it, the idea of you gentlemen is that this man Largo will
be coming back any minute now in his plane after picking up the bombs
from where he hid them. If he’s got the bombs, and on what you’ve told
me I’ll go along with the probability that he has, this girl will give
us the tip-off. Then we close in and arrest his ship or blow it out of
the water. Right? But supposing he hasn’t got the bombs on board, or for
one reason or another we don’t get the tip-off, what do we do then?’

Bond said quietly, ‘We follow him, sit close on his tail, until the time
limit, that’s about twenty-four hours from now, is up. That’s all we can
do without causing one hell of a legal stink. When the time limit’s up,
we can hand the whole problem back to our governments and they can
decide what to do with the _Disco_ and the sunken plane and all the
rest. By that time, some little man in a speedboat we’ve never heard of
may have left one of the bombs off the coast of America, and Miami may
have gone up in the air. Or there may be a big bang somewhere else in
the world. There’s been plenty of time to take those bombs off the plane
and get them thousands of miles from here. Well, that’ll be too bad and
we’ll have muffed it. But at this moment we’re in the position of a
detective watching a man he thinks is going to commit a murder. Doesn’t
even know for sure whether he’s got a gun on him or not. There’s nothing
the detective can do but follow the man and wait until he actually pulls
the gun out of his pocket and points it. Then, and only then, the
detective can shoot the man or arrest him.’ Bond turned to Leiter.
‘Isn’t that about it, Felix?’

‘That’s how it figures. And Captain, Commander Bond here and I are damn
sure Largo’s our man and that he’ll be sailing for his target in no time
at all. That’s why we agreed to panic and ask you along. One gets you a
hundred he’ll be placing that bomb at night and tonight’s the last night
he’s got. By the way, Captain, have you got steam up, or whatever the
atom boys call it?’

‘I have, and we can be under way in just about five minutes.’ The
captain shook his head. ‘But there’s one bit of bad news for you,
gentlemen. I just can’t figure how we’re going to keep track of the
_Disco_.’

‘How’s that? You’ve got the speed, haven’t you?’ Leiter caught himself
pointing his steel hook threateningly at the captain, and hastily
brought it down again to his lap.

The captain smiled. ‘Guess so. Guess we could give her a good race on a
straight course, but you gentlemen don’t seem to have figured on the
navigational hazards in this part of the ocean.’ He pointed at the
British Admiralty chart on the wall. ‘Take a look at that. Ever seen a
chart with so many figures on it? Looks like a spilled ants’ nest. Those
are soundings, gentlemen, and I can tell you that unless the _Disco_
sticks to one of the deep-water channels—Tongue of the Ocean,
North-West Providence Channel, or the North-East—we’ve had it, as
Commander Bond would say. All the rest of that area’—he waved a
hand—‘may look the same blue colour on a map, but after your trip in
that Grumman Goose you know darned well it isn’t the same blue colour.
Darned near the whole of that area is banks and shoal with only around
three to ten fathoms over it. If I was quite crazy and looking for a
nice cosy job ashore, I’d take the ship along surfaced in ten
fathoms—if I could bribe the navigator and seal off the echo-sounder
from crew members. But even if we got a long spell of ten fathoms on the
chart, you got to remember that’s an old chart, dates back to the days
of sail, and these banks have been shifting for more than fifty years
since it was drawn up. Then there’s the tides that set directly on to
and off the banks, and the coral niggerheads that won’t show up on the
echo-sounder until you hear the echo of them smashing up the hull or the
screw.’ The captain turned back to his desk. ‘No, gentlemen. This
Italian vessel was darned well chosen. With that hydrofoil device of
hers, she probably doesn’t draw more than a fathom. If she chooses to
keep to the shallows, we just haven’t got a chance. And that’s flat.’
The captain looked from one to another of them. ‘Want me to call up the
Navy Department and have Fort Lauderdale take over with those fighter
bombers you’ve got on call—get them to do a shadowing job?’

The two men looked at each other. Bond said, ‘She won’t be showing
lights. They’ll have the hell of a job picking her up at night. What do
you say, Felix? Maybe we’d better call them out even if it’s only to
keep some sort of a watch off the American coast. Then, if the Captain’s
willing, we’ll take the North-West Channel—if the _Disco_ sails, that
is—and bank on the Bahamas Rocket Station being Target No 1.’

Felix Leiter ran his left hand through the mop of straw-coloured hair.
‘Goddammit,’ he said angrily. ‘Hell yes, I suppose so. We’re looking
fools enough already bringing the _Manta_ on stage. What’s a squadron of
planes? Sure. We’ve just _got_ to back our hunch that it’s Largo and the
_Disco_. Come on, let’s get together with the Captain and whip off a
signal that doesn’t look too damned silly—copy to CIA and to your
Chief. How do you want it to go?’

‘Admiralty for M, prefixed Operation Thunderball.’ Bond wiped a hand
down over his face. ‘God, this is going to put the cat among the
pigeons.’ He looked up at the big metal wall clock. ‘Six. That’ll be
midnight in London. Popular time to get a signal like this.’

The PA System in the ceiling spoke more clearly. ‘Watch Officer to
Captain. Police officer with urgent message for Commander Bond.’ The
captain pressed a switch and spoke into a desk microphone. ‘Bring him
below. Prepare to cast off lines. All hands prepare for sailing.’ The
captain waited for the acknowledgement and released the switch. The
captain smiled across at them. He said to Bond, ‘What’s the name of that
girl? Domino? Well, Domino, say the good word.’

The door opened. A police corporal, his hat off, crashed to attention on
the steel flooring and extended a stiff arm. Bond took the buff OHMS
envelope and slit it open. He ran his eyes down the pencilled message
signed by the Police Commissioner. Unemotionally he read out:

    ‘PLANE RETURNED 1730 HOISTED INBOARD. DISCO SAILED AT 1755, FULL
    SPEED, COURSE NORTH WEST STOP GIRL DID NOT REPEAT NOT REAPPEAR
    ON DECK AFTER BOARDING.’

Bond borrowed a signal blank from the captain and wrote:

    MANTA WILL ENDEAVOUR SHADOW VIA NORTHWEST PROVIDENCE CHANNEL
    STOP FIGHTER BOMBER SQUADRON FROM FORT LAUDERDALE WILL BE ASKED
    THROUGH NAVY DEPARTMENT TO COOPERATE WITHIN RADIUS OF TWO
    HUNDRED MILES OFF FLORIDA COAST STOP MANTA WILL KEEP CONTACT
    THROUGH WINDSOR FIELD AIR CONTROL STOP NAVY DEPARTMENT AND
    ADMIRALTY BEING INFORMED STOP PLEASE INFORM GOVERNOR ALSO
    ADMIRAL CARLSON AND BRIGADIER FAIRCHILD ON ARRIVAL.

Bond signed the message and passed it to the captain, who also signed,
as did Leiter. Bond put the message in an envelope and gave it to the
corporal, who wheeled smartly and clanked out in his heavy boots.

When the door was shut, the captain pressed down the switch on the
intercom. He gave orders to sail, surfaced, course due north, at ten
knots. Then he switched off. In the short silence, there was a flurry of
background noise, piping of bosuns’ whistles, a thin mechanical whine,
and the sound of running feet. The submarine trembled slightly. The
captain said quietly, ‘Well, gentlemen, that’s that. I’d like to have
the goose a bit less wild and a bit more solid. But I’ll be glad to
chase her for you. Now then, that signal.’

With only half his mind on the wording of the signal, Bond sat and
worried about the significance of the Commissioner’s message and about
Domino. It looked bad. It looked as if either the plane had not brought
back the two bombs, or one of them, in which case the mobilization of
the _Manta_ and of the fighter bombers was a pretty meaningless
precaution, hardly justified by the evidence. It could easily be that
the crashed Vindicator and the missing bombs were the work of some
entirely different group and that, while they chased the _Disco_, the
field was being left clear for SPECTRE. But Bond’s instincts refused to
allow him to accept this possibility. As cover, the whole _Disco_-Largo
set-up was one hundred per cent watertight. It could not be faulted in
any respect. That in itself was enough to arouse Bond’s suspicions. A
plot of this magnitude and audacity could only have been conceived under
faultless cover and down to the smallest detail. Largo could have just
set off on his treasure hunt, and everything, down to the last-minute
plane recce of the treasure location, to see if there were any fishing
boats about for instance, fitted in with that possibility. Or he could
be sailing to lay the bomb, adjust the time fuse for perhaps a few hours
after the deadline to allow time for its recovery or destruction if
England and America at the last moment agreed to pay the ransom, and get
far enough away from the danger area to avoid the explosion and
establish an alibi. But where was the bomb? Had it arrived on board in
the plane and had Domino for some reason been unable to go up on deck to
make her signal? Or was it going to be picked up en route to the target
area? The westerly course from Nassau, heading perhaps for the
North-West Light, through the Berry Island Channel, fitted both
possibilities. The sunken plane lay westwards, south of the Biminis, and
so did Miami and other possible targets on the American coast. Or, after
passing through the channel, about fifty miles west of Nassau, the
_Disco_ could veer sharply northwards and, after another fifty miles of
sailing through shoal water that would discourage pursuit, get back into
the North-West Providence Channel and make straight for the Grand
Bahamas and the missile station.

Bond, fretted with indecision and the fear that he and Leiter were
making majestic fools of themselves, forced himself to face one
certainty—he and Leiter and the _Manta_ were engaged on a crazy gamble.
If the bomb was on board, if the _Disco_ veered north for the Grand
Bahamas and the missile station then, by racing up the North-West
Channel, the _Manta_ might intercept her in time.

But if this gamble came off, with all its possibilities of error, why
hadn’t Domino made her signal? What had happened to her?




                                   21


                       _Very Softly, Very Slowly_

The _Disco_, a dark torpedo leaving a deep, briefly creaming wake,
hurtled across the indigo mirror of the sea. In the big stateroom there
was silence save for the dull boom of the engines and the soft tinkle of
a glass on the sideboard. Although, as a precaution, the storm shutters
were battened down over the portholes, the only light inside came from a
single port navigation lantern hung from the roof. The dim red light
only just illuminated the faces of the twenty men sitting round the long
table, and the red-and-black-shadowed features, contorting with the
slight sway of the top light, gave the scene the appearance of a
conspiracy in hell.

At the top of the table Largo, his face, though the cabin was
air-conditioned, shining with sweat, began to speak. His voice was tense
and hoarse with strain. ‘I have to report that we are in a state of
emergency. Half an hour ago, No 17 found Miss Vitali in the well-deck.
She was standing fiddling with a camera. When No 17 came upon her she
lifted the camera and pretended to take a photograph of Palmyra,
although the safety cap was over the lens. No 17 was suspicious. He
reported to me. I went below and took her to her cabin. She struggled
with me. Her whole attitude aroused my suspicions. I was forced to
subdue her by drastic measures. I took the camera and examined it.’
Largo paused. He said quietly, ‘The camera was a fake. It concealed a
Geiger counter. The counter was, very naturally, registering over 500
milliroentgens. I brought her back to consciousness and questioned her.
She refused to talk. In due course I shall force her to do so and then
she will be eliminated. It was time to sail. I again rendered her
unconscious and roped her securely to her bunk. I have now summoned this
meeting to acquaint you of this occurrence, which I have already
reported to No 2.’

Largo was silent. A threatening, exasperated growl came from round the
table. No 14, one of the Germans, said through his teeth, ‘And what,
Mister No 1, did No 2 have to say about this?’

‘He said we were to carry on. He said the whole world is full of Geiger
counters looking for us. The secret services of the whole world have
been mobilized against us. Some busybody in Nassau, the police probably,
was perhaps ordered to have a radiation search made of all ships in
harbour. Perhaps Miss Vitali was bribed to bring the counter on board.
But No 2 said that once we have placed the weapon in the target area
there will be nothing to fear. I have had the radio operator listening
for unusual traffic between Nassau and the Coast. The density is quite
normal. If we were suspected, Nassau would be deluged with wireless
traffic from London and Washington. But all is quiet. So the operation
will proceed as planned. When we are well away from the area, we will
dispose of the lead casing of the weapon. The lead casing will contain
Miss Vitali.’

No 14 persisted: ‘But you will first obtain the truth from this woman?
It is not pleasant for our future plans to think that we may be under
suspicion.’

‘Interrogation will begin as soon as the meeting is over. If you want my
opinion, these two men who came on board yesterday—this Bond and the
man Larkin—may be involved. They may be secret agents. The so-called
Larkin had a camera. I did not look at it closely, but it was similar to
that in the possession of Miss Vitali. I blame myself for not having
been more careful with these two men. But their story was convincing. On
our return to Nassau tomorrow morning, we shall have to be circumspect.
Miss Vitali will have fallen overboard. I will work out the details of
the story. There will be an inquest. This will be irritating but nothing
more. Our witnesses will be unshakeable. It will be wise to use the
coins as additional alibi for our whereabouts tonight. No 5, is the
state of erosion of the coins satisfactory?’

No 5, Kotze the physicist, said judiciously, ‘It is no more than
adequate. But they will pass examination, a cursory examination. They
are authentic doubloons and Reals of the early seventeenth century. Sea
water has no great effect on gold and silver. I have used a little acid
to pit them. They will of course have to be handed to the coroner and
declared as treasure trove. It would need a far greater expert than he
or the court to pass judgement on them. There will be no compulsion to
reveal the location of the treasure. We could perhaps give the depth of
water—ten fathoms let us say, and an unspecified reef. I see no means
by which our story could be upset. There is often very deep water
outside reefs. Miss Vitali could have had trouble with her aqualung and
could have been seen disappearing over the deep shelf where our
echo-sounder gave the depth as a hundred fathoms. We did our best to
dissuade her from taking part in the search. But she was an expert
swimmer. The romance of the occasion was too much for her.’ No 5 opened
his hands. ‘There are often accidents of this nature. Many lives are
lost in this way every year. A thorough search was instituted, but there
were shark. The treasure hunt was broken off and we immediately returned
to Nassau to report the tragedy.’ No 5 shook his head decisively. ‘I see
no reason to be dismayed by this occurrence. But I am in favour of a
most rigorous interrogation.’ No 5 turned his head politely in Largo’s
direction. ‘There are certain uses of electricity of which I have
knowledge. The human body cannot resist them. If I can be of any service
. . . ?’

Largo’s voice was equally polite. They might have been discussing
remedies for a seasick passenger. ‘Thank you. I have means of persuasion
that I have found satisfactory in the past. But I shall certainly call
upon you if the case is an obstinate one.’ Largo looked down the table
into the shadowed, ruby faces. ‘And now we will quickly run through the
final details.’ He glanced down at his watch. ‘It is midnight. There
will be two hours’ moonlight starting at three am. The first light of
dawn will be shortly after five am. We thus have two hours for the
operation. Our course will bring us in towards West End from the south.
This is a normal entry to the islands, and even if our further progress
towards the target area is noted by the missile station radar it will
only be assumed that we are a yacht that has strayed slightly off
course. We shall anchor at exactly three am and the swimming party will
leave for the half-mile swim to the laying point. The fifteen of you who
will be taking part in this swim will, as arranged, swim in arrow
formation, the Chariot and the sled with the missile in the centre.
Formation must be strictly kept to avoid straying. The blue torch on my
back should be an adequate beacon, but if any man gets lost, he returns
to the ship. Is that understood? The first duty of the escort will be to
watch for shark and barracuda. I will again remind you that the range of
your guns is not much more than twenty feet and that fish must be hit in
or behind the head. Any man who is about to fire must warn his
neighbour, who will then stand by to give additional fire if required.
However, one hit should be sufficient to kill if the curare is, as we
have been informed, not affected by the passage through sea-water. Above
all,’ Largo put his hands decisively down on the table before him, ‘do
not forget to remove the small protective sheath from the barb before
firing.’ Largo raised his hands. ‘You will forgive me for repeating
these points. We have had many exercises in similar conditions and I
have confidence that all will be well. But the underwater terrain will
be unfamiliar and the effect of the dexedrine pills—they will be issued
to the swimming party after this meeting—will be to sensitize the
nervous system as well as provide the extra stamina and encouragement.
So we must all be prepared for the unexpected and know how to handle it.
Are there any further questions?’

During the planning stages, months before in Paris, Blofeld had warned
Largo that if trouble was caused by any members of his team it was to be
expected from the two Russians, the ex-members of SMERSH, No 10 and No
11. ‘Conspiracy,’ Blofeld had said, ‘is their lifeblood. Hand in hand
with conspiracy walks suspicion. These two men will always be wondering
if they are not the object of some subsidiary plot—to give them the
most dangerous work, to make them fall-guys for the police, to kill them
and steal their share of the profits. They will be inclined to inform
against their colleagues and always to have reservations about the plans
that are agreed upon. For them, the obvious plan, the right way to do a
thing, will have been chosen for some ulterior reason which is being
kept hidden from them. They will need constant reassurance that nothing
is being kept hidden from them, but, once they have accepted their
orders, they will carry them out meticulously and without regard for
their personal safety. Such men, apart from their special talents, are
worth having. But you will please remember what I have said and, should
there be trouble, should they try and sow mistrust within the team, you
must act quickly and with utter ruthlessness. The maggots of mistrust
and disloyalty must not be allowed to get a hold in your team. They are
the enemies within that can destroy even the most meticulous planning.’

Now No 10, a once-famous SMERSH terrorist called Strelik, began talking.
He was sitting two places away from Largo, on his left. He did not
address Largo, but the meeting. He said, ‘Comrades, I am thinking of the
interesting matters recounted by No 1, and I am telling myself that
everything has been excellently arranged. I am also thinking that this
operation will be a very fine one and that it will certainly not be
necessary to explode the second weapon on Target No 2. I have some
documentations on these islands and I am learning from the _Yachtsman’s_
(No 10 had trouble with the word) _Guide to the Bahamas_ that there is a
big new hotel within a few miles of our target site, also a scattered
township. I am therefore estimating that the explosion of Weapon No 1
will destroy perhaps two thousand persons. Two thousand persons is not
very many in my country and their death, compared with the devastation
of this important missile station, would not, in the Soviet Union, be
considered of great importance. I am thinking that it will be otherwise
in the West and that the destruction of these people and the rescuing of
the survivors will be considered a grave matter that will act decisively
towards immediate agreement with our terms and the saving of Target No 2
from destruction. This being so, Comrades,’ the dull, flat voice gained
a trace of animation, ‘I am saying to myself that within as little as
twenty-four hours our labours will have been completed and the great
prize will be within our grasp. Now, Comrades,’ the red and black
shadows turned the taut little smile into a dark grimace, ‘with so much
money so near at hand, a most unworthy thought has come into my mind.’
(Largo put his hand in his coat pocket and put up the safe on the little
Colt •25.) ‘And I would not be performing my duty to my Russian comrade,
No 11, nor to the other members of our team if I did not share this
thought with you at the same time requesting forbearance for what may be
unfounded suspicions.’

The meeting was very quiet, ominously so. These men had all been secret
agents or conspirators. They recognized the smell of insurrection, the
shadow of approaching disloyalty. What did No 10 know? What was he going
to divulge? Each man got ready to decide very quickly which way to jump
when the cat was let out of the bag. Largo slipped the gun out of his
pocket and held it along his thigh.

‘There will come a moment,’ continued No 10, watching the faces of the
men opposite for a quick gauge of their reactions ‘very shortly, when
fifteen of us, leaving five members and six sub-agents on board this
ship, will be out there,’ he waved a hand at the cabin wall, ‘in the
darkness, at least half an hour’s swim from this ship. At that moment,
Comrades,’ the voice became sly, ‘what a thing it would be if those
remaining on board were to sail the ship away and leave us in the
water.’ There was a shifting and muttering round the table. No 10 held
up a hand. ‘Ridiculous, I am thinking, and so no doubt are you,
Comrades. But we are men of a feather. We recognize the unworthy urges
that can come upon even the best of friends and comrades when fortunes
are at stake. And, Comrades, with fifteen of us gone, how much more of a
fortune would there be for those remaining, with their story for No 2 of
a great fight with sharks in which we all succumbed?’

Largo said softly, ‘And what is it you propose, No. 10?’

For the first time, No 10 looked to his right. He could not see the
expression in Largo’s eye. He spoke at the great red and black mass of
his face. The tone of his voice was obstinate. He said, ‘I am proposing
that one member of each national group should stay on board to safeguard
the interests of the other members of his national group. That would
reduce the swimming party to ten. In this way those who are undertaking
this dangerous work would go about it with more enthusiasm knowing that
no such happening as I have mentioned could come about.’

Largo’s voice was polite, unemotional. He said, ‘I have one very short
and simple answer to your suggestion, No 10.’ The light glittered redly
on the metal thumb that protruded from the big hand. The three bullets
pumped so quickly into the face of the Russian that the three
explosions, the three bright flashes, were almost one. No 10 put up two
feeble hands, palms forward, as if to catch any further bullets, gave a
jerk forward with his stomach at the edge of the table and then crashed
heavily backwards, in a splinter of chair wood, on to the floor.

Largo put the muzzle of the gun up to his nose and delicately sniffed at
it, moving it to and fro under the nostrils as if it was some delicious
vial of perfume. In the silence, he looked slowly down one rank of faces
and up the other. Finally he said softly, ‘The meeting is now at an end.
Will all members please return to their cabins and look for a last time
to their equipment. Food will be ready from now on in the galley. One
drink of alcohol will also be available for those who want it. I will
detail two crew members to look after the late No 10. Thank you.’

When Largo was alone he got to his feet, stretched, and gave a great
cavernous yawn. Then he turned to the sideboard, opened a drawer and
took out a box of Corona cigars. He chose one and, with a gesture of
distaste, lit it. He then took the closed red rubber container that held
the ice cubes and walked out of the door and along to the cabin of
Domino Vitali.

He closed the door and locked it. Here also, a red riding light hung
from the ceiling. Under it, on the double bunk, the girl lay offered
like a starfish, her ankles and wrists strapped to the four corners of
the ironwork below the mattress. Largo put the icebox down on the chest
of drawers and balanced the cigar carefully beside it so that the
glowing tip would not spoil the varnish.

The girl watched him, her eyes glittering red points in the
semi-darkness.

Largo said, ‘My dear, I have had great enjoyment out of your body, much
pleasure. In return, unless you tell me who gave you that machine to
bring on board, I shall be forced to cause you great pain. It will be
caused with these two simple instruments,’ he held up the cigar and blew
on the tip until it glowed brightly, ‘this for heat, and these ice cubes
for cold. Applied scientifically, as I shall apply them, they will have
the inevitable effect of causing your voice, when it has stopped
screaming, to speak, and speak the truth. Now then. Which is [it] to
be?’

The girl’s voice was deadly with hate. She said, ‘You killed my brother
and you will now kill me. Go on and enjoy yourself. You are already a
piece of death yourself. When the rest of it comes, very soon, I pray
God you will suffer a million times more than both of us.’

Largo’s laugh was a short, harsh bark. He walked over to the edge of the
bunk. He said, ‘Very well, my dear. We must see what we can do with you,
very softly and very, very slowly.’

He bent down and hooked his fingers in the neckline of her shirt and the
join of the brassiere. Very slowly, but with great force, he tore
downwards, the whole length of her. Then he threw aside the torn halves
of material and exposed the whole gleaming length of her body. He
examined it carefully and reflectively and then went to the chest of
drawers and took the cigar and the bowl of ice cubes and came back and
made himself comfortable on the edge of the bunk.

Then he took a puff at the cigar, knocked the ash off on to the floor
and leant forward.




                                   22


                             _The Shadower_

In the attack centre of the _Manta_ it was very quiet. Commander
Pedersen, standing behind the man at the echo-sounder, occasionally made
a comment over his shoulder to Bond and Leiter, who had been given
canvas-backed chairs well away from the depth- and speed-gauges, which
had been hooded so that they could only be read by the navigating team.
These three men sat side by side on red leather, foam cushioned,
aluminium seats, handling the rudder and the forward and aft diving
planes as if they were pilots in an airliner. Now the captain left the
echo-sounder and came over to Bond and Leiter. He smiled cheerfully.
‘Thirty fathoms and the nearest cay is a mile to westwards. Now we’ve
got a clear course all the way to Grand Bahama. And we’re making good
speed. If we keep it up, we’ve got about four hours’ sailing. Be off
Grand Bahama about an hour before first light. How about some food and a
bit of sleep? There won’t be anything on the radar for an hour—these
Berry Islands’ll fill the screen until we’re clear of them. Then’ll come
the big question. When we clear them, shall we see that one of the
smallest of the cays has broken loose and is sailing fast northwards on
a parallel course to ours? If we see that on the screen, it’ll be the
_Disco_. If she’s there, we’ll submerge. You’ll hear the alarm bells.
But you can just roll over and have a bit more sleep. Nothing can happen
until it’s certain that she’s in the target area. Then we’ll have to
think again.’ The captain made for the stairway. ‘Mind if I lead the
way? Watch your head on the pipes. This is the one part of the ship
where there isn’t much clearance.’

They followed him down and along a passage to the mess hall, a
well-lighted dining-room finished in cream with pastel pink and green
panels. They took their places at the head of one of the Formica-top
tables away from the other officers and men, who looked curiously at the
two civilians. The captain waved a hand at the walls of the room. ‘Bit
of a change from the old battleship grey. You’d be surprised how many
eggheads are involved in the design of these ships. Have to be, if you
want to keep your crew happy when the ship’s submerged for a month or
more at a time. The trick-cyclists said we couldn’t have just one
colour, must have contrast everywhere or the men’s eyes get sort of
depressed. This hall’s used for movies, closed-circuit television,
cribbage tournaments, bingo, God knows what—anything to keep the men
off duty from getting bored. And you notice there’s no smell of cooking
or engine smells. Electrostatic precipitators all over the ship that
filter them off.’ A steward came with menus. ‘Now then, let’s get down
to it. I’m having the baked Virginia ham with red-eye gravy, apple-pie
with ice cream, and iced coffee. And steward, don’t go too easy on that
red-eye.’ He turned to Bond. ‘Getting out of harbour always gives me an
appetite. You know, it isn’t the sea the captain hates, it’s the land.’

Bond ordered poached eggs with rye toast and coffee. He was grateful for
the captain’s cheerful talk, but he himself had no appetite. There was a
gnawing tension inside him which would only be released when the _Disco_
was picked up on the radar and there would be a prospect of action. And
lurking behind his concern about the whole operation was worry about the
girl. Had he been right to trust her with so much of the truth? Had she
betrayed him? Had she been caught? Was she alive? He drank down a glass
of iced water, and listened to the captain explaining how the ice cubes
and the water were distilled from the sea.

Finally Bond became impatient with the cheerful, even tone of the
conversation. He said, ‘Forgive me, Captain, but could I interrupt for a
moment and clear my mind about what we’re going to do if we’re right
about the _Disco_ and if we come up with her off the Grand Bahama? I
can’t quite figure what the next step ought to be. I’ve got my own
ideas, but were you thinking we’d try and go alongside and board her, or
just blow her out of the water?’

The captain’s grey eyes were quizzical. He said, ‘I was kind of leaving
all that to you fellers. The Navy Department says that I’m under your
orders. I’m just the chauffeur. Supposing you tell me what you have in
mind and I’ll be glad to go along with anything you suggest so long as
it doesn’t endanger my ship—’ he smiled—‘too much, that is. In the
last resort, if the Navy Department means what it says, and from your
account of this operation it does, the safety of the ship will also have
to go by the board. As I told you aloft in the attack centre, I got
acknowledgement of our signal and full approval for our proposed course
of action. That’s all the clearance I need. Now then, you tell me.’

The food came. Bond pecked at his eggs and pushed them away. He lit a
cigarette. He said, looking at Felix Leiter, ‘Well, I don’t know what
you’ve worked out, Felix, but this is how I see the picture we may find
around four o’clock in the morning, on the assumption, that is, that the
_Disco_ has been sailing north in shoal water under cover of the Berry
Islands and that she’ll then make for the Grand Bahama shore somewhere
off the site of the missile station. Well now, on that assumption, I’ve
had a good look at the charts and it seems to me that, if she’s going to
lay that bomb as close to the target as she can, she’ll heave to and
anchor about a mile off-shore in about ten fathoms and get the bomb
another half-mile or so closer to the target, lay it in twelve feet of
water or so, switch on the time mechanism and get the hell away. That’s
how I’d go about it. She’d be away by first light and there’s plenty of
yacht traffic around West End from what I can gather from the pilot.
She’d show up on the station radar of course, but she’d be just another
yacht. Assuming the bomb’s set for the twelve hours Largo’s got before
the time limit expires, he could be back in Nassau or twice as far away
if he wanted in the time he’s got. For my money, he’ll go back to Nassau
with his treasure-hunting story and wait for the next lot of orders from
SPECTRE.’ Bond paused. He avoided Leiter’s eyes. ‘That is, unless he’s
managed to get information out of the girl.’

Leiter said staunchly, ‘Hell, I don’t believe that girl would talk.
She’s a tough cookie. And supposing she did? He’s only got to drop her
overboard with some lead round her neck and say her aqualung failed on
the treasure hunt, or some spiel of that sort. He’d go back to Nassau
all right. That man’s cover’s as solid as J. P. Morgan and Company.’

The captain interrupted. ‘Leaving all that aside, Commander Bond, and
sticking to the operational angles, how do you suggest he’s going to get
that bomb out of the ship and right into the target area? I agree that
according to the charts he can’t get much closer in the yacht, and if he
did he might be in trouble with the waterfront guard at the missile
station. I see from my dope on the place that they’ve got some kind of a
guard-boat for chasing away fishermen and suchlike when they’re going to
do a practice shoot.’

Bond said decisively, ‘I’m sure that’s the real purpose of the
underwater compartment in the _Disco_. They’ve got one of those
underwater sleds in there, and probably an electric torpedo to haul it.
They’ll load the bomb on the sled and take it in with a team of
underwater swimmers, lay it and come back to the ship. Otherwise, why
have all that underwater gear?’

The captain said slowly, ‘You may be right, Commander. It makes sense.
But so what do you want me to do about it?’

Bond looked the captain in the eye. ‘There’s only one moment to nail
these people. If we show our hand too soon, the _Disco_ can get the hell
away—only a few hundred yards maybe, and dump the bombs in a hundred
fathoms. The only time to get them, and the bomb, the first bomb anyway,
is when that team has left the ship and is on its way to the laying
point. We’ve got to get their underwater team with our underwater team.
The second bomb, if it’s aboard, doesn’t matter. We can sink the ship
with the second bomb inside her.’

The captain looked down at his plate. He arranged the knife and fork
tidily together, straightened the dessert spoon and took the remains of
his iced coffee and swirled the fragments of ice round so that they
tinkled. He put the glass back on the table and looked up, first at
Leiter then at Bond. He said thoughtfully, ‘I guess what you say makes
sense, Commander. We have plenty of oxygen rebreathers on board. We also
have ten of the finest swimmers in the Nuclear Flotilla. But they’ll
only have knives to fight with. I’ll have to ask for volunteers.’ He
paused. ‘Who’s going to lead them?’

Bond said, ‘I’ll do that. Skin-diving happens to be one of my hobbies.
And I know what fish to look out for and which ones not to mind about.
I’ll brief your men about those things.’

Felix Leiter interrupted. He said obstinately, ‘And don’t think you’re
going to leave me behind eating Virginia ham. I put an extra
foot-flipper on this,’ he held up the shining hook, ‘and I’ll race you
over half a mile any day, gammy leg and all. You’d be surprised the
things one gets around to improvise when someone chews off one of your
arms. Compensation it’s called by the medics, in case you hadn’t heard
about it.’

The captain smiled. He got to his feet. ‘Okay, okay. I’ll leave you two
heroes to fight it out while I have a word to the men over the speaker
system. Then we’ll have to get together with the charts and see that the
gear’s okay and suchlike. You fellers aren’t going to get any sleep
after all. I’ll have a ration of battle pills issued to you. You’re
going to need them.’ He raised a hand and went off down the mess hall.

Leiter turned to Bond. ‘You goddam shyster. Thought you were going to
leave your old pal behind, didn’t you? God, the treachery of you Limeys!
Perfidious Albion is right, all right.’

Bond laughed. ‘How the hell was I to know you’d been in the hands of
rehabilitators and therapists and so on? I never knew you took life so
seriously. I suppose you’ve even found some way of petting with that
damned meathook of yours.’

Leiter said darkly, ‘You’d be surprised. Get a girl round the arm with
this and you’d be amazed the effect it has on their good resolutions.
Now then, let’s get down to cases. What sort of formation are we going
to swim in? Can we get some of those knives made into lances? How are we
going to recognize our side from theirs underwater, and in semi-darkness
at that? We’ve got to make this operation pretty solid. That Pedersen’s
a good guy. We don’t want to get some of his men killed through some
damn silly mistake of ours.’

The voice of the captain sounded over the communication system. ‘Now
hear this. This is your Captain speaking. It is possible that we may
encounter hazards in the course of this operation. I will tell you how
this may come about. This ship has been chosen by the Navy Department
for an exercise that is tantamount to an operation of war. I will tell
you the story, which will remain classified top secret until further
orders. This is what has happened . . .’

                                   ★

Bond, asleep in one of the duty officers’ bunks, was awakened by the
alarm bell. The iron voice of the PA System said: ‘Diving stations.
Diving stations,’ and almost at once his bunk tilted slightly and the
distant whine of the engines altered pitch. Bond smiled grimly to
himself. He slipped off the bunk and went along and up to the attack
centre. Felix Leiter was already there. The captain turned away from the
plot. His face was tense. He said, ‘It looks as if you were right,
gentlemen. We’ve got her all right. About five miles ahead and two
points to starboard. She’s doing around thirty knots. No other ship
could be holding that speed, or would be likely to. And she’s showing no
lights. Here, care to have a look through the scope? She’s raising quite
a wake and kicking up plenty of phosphorescence. No moon yet, but you’ll
see the white blur when your eyes get used to the dark.’

Bond bent to the rubber eye sockets. In a minute he had her, a white
scut on the horizon of the soft, feathery swell. He stood back. ‘What’s
her course?’

‘Same as ours—western end of Grand Bahama. We’ll go deeper now and put
on a bit of speed. We’ve got her on the Sonar as well, so we shan’t lose
her. We’ll get up parallel and close in a bit later. The met. report
gives a light westerly breeze in the early hours. That’d be a help.
Don’t want it too calm when we unload the swimming party. The surface’ll
boil quite a bit as each man goes out. Here,’ he turned to a
powerful-looking man in white ducks, ‘this is Petty Officer Fallon. He’s
in command of the swimming party, under your and Mr Leiter’s orders of
course. All the top swimmers volunteered. He’s chosen nine of them. I’ve
taken them off all duties. Maybe you gentlemen would like to get
acquainted with your team. You’ll want to discuss your routines. I guess
discipline’ll have to be pretty tight—recognition signals and so forth.
Okay? The sergeant at arms is looking after the weapons.’ He smiled.
‘He’s rustled up a dozen flick knives. Had some difficulty persuading
the men to give them up, but he’s done it. He’s barbed them and
sharpened them down almost to needles then fitted them into the tops of
broom handles. Guess he’ll make you sign an indent for the brooms or
he’ll have the supply officer on top of him when we get out of this. All
right then. Be seeing you. Ask for anything you want.’ He turned back to
the plot.

Bond and Leiter followed Petty Officer Fallon along the lower deck to
the engine room and then to the engine repair shop. On their way they
passed through the reactor room. The reactor, the equivalent of a
controlled atomic bomb, was an obscene knee-level bulge rising out of
the thickly leaded deck. As they passed it, Leiter whispered to Bond,
‘Liquid sodium Submarine Intermediate Reactor Mark B.’ He grinned sourly
and crossed himself.

Bond gave the thing a sideway kick with his shoe. ‘Steam-age stuff. Our
Navy’s got the Mark C.’

The repair shop, a long low room equipped with various forms of
precision machinery, presented a curious sight. At one end were grouped
the nine swimmers clad only in bathing trunks, their fine bodies glowing
with sunburn. At the other, two men in grey overalls, drab figures of
the machine age, were working in semi-darkness with only pinpoints of
bright light cast on the whirring lathes from which the knife blades
threw small fountains of blue and orange sparks. Some of the swimmers
already had their spears. After the introductions, Bond took one and
examined it. It was a deadly weapon, the blade, sharpened to a stiletto
and notched near the top into a barb, firmly wired into the top of a
long stout stave. Bond thumbed the needle-sharp steel and touched the
tip. Even a shark’s skin would not stand up to that. But what would the
enemy have? CO2 guns for a certainty. Bond looked the smiling bronzed
young men over. There were going to be casualties—perhaps many.
Everything must be done to effect surprise. But those golden skins and
his own and Leiter’s paler skins would show at twenty feet in the
moonlight—all right for the guns, but well out of range of the spears.
Bond turned to Petty Officer Fallon: ‘I suppose you don’t have rubber
suits on board?’

‘Why sure, Commander. Have to, for escape in cold waters.’ He smiled.
‘We’re not always sailing among the palm trees.’

‘We’ll all need them. And could you get white or yellow numbers, big
ones, painted on their backs? Then we’ll know more or less who’s who.’

‘Sure, sure.’ He called to his men. ‘Hey, Fonda and Johnson. Go along to
the Quartermaster, and draw rubber suits for the whole team. Bracken,
get a pail of rubber solution paint from Stores. Paint numbers on the
backs of the suits. A foot deep. From one to twelve. Get going.’

Later, with the gleaming black suits hanging like giant bat-skins along
the wall, Bond called the team together. ‘Men, we’re going to have one
hell of an underwater battle. There’ll be casualties. Anyone care to
change his mind?’ The faces grinned back at him. ‘All right then. Now,
we’ll be swimming at around ten feet for a quarter, perhaps half a mile.
It’ll be pretty light. The moon’ll be up and the bottom’s white sand
with some seagrass. We’ll take it easy and go in triangle formation with
me, No 1, leading followed by Mr Leiter here as No 2, and Petty Officer
Fallon as No 3. Then we broaden out behind like a wedge of geese. All
you have to do is follow the number in front of you and no one’ll get
lost. Watch out for isolated niggerheads. As far as I can gather from
the chart there’s no true reef, only broken clumps. It’ll be getting on
for early feeding time for the fish, so watch out for anything big. But
leave it alone unless it gets too inquisitive. Then three of you take it
on with the spears. But don’t forget that it’s most unlikely any fish
will attack us. Close together we’ll look like one hell of a big black
fish to anyone else and I guess we’ll be given a wide berth. Watch out
for sea eggs on the coral and mind the tips of your spears. Hold them
right up near the blade. Above all, keep quiet. We must try and get
surprise on our side. The enemy’s got CO2 guns, range about twenty feet.
But they’re slow things to reload. If one’s aimed at you, try and give a
small target. Keep flat in the water. Don’t put your feet down and give
him a full-length target. As soon as he’s fired, go for him like hell
with your spear right out. One jab of those things in almost any part of
the head or body and your man’s had it. Wounded men will have to look
after themselves. We can’t spare stretcher bearers. If you’re wounded,
back out of the fight and get away to a coral clump and rest on it. Or
make for the shore and shallow water. If you’ve got a spear in you don’t
try and pull it out. Just hold it in the wound until someone gets to
you. Petty Officer Fallon will have one of the ship’s signal flares.
He’ll release that to the surface as soon as our attack begins and your
Captain will at once surface and put out an escape dinghy with an armed
party and the ship’s surgeon. Now then, any questions?’

‘What do we do as soon as we get out of the sub, sir?’

‘Try and not make any fuss on the surface. Get down quickly to ten feet
and take your place in the formation. We’re likely to get help from a
light breeze, but we’re bound to create turbulence on the surface. Keep
it down as much as you can.’

‘What about signals underwater, sir. Suppose a mask goes wrong or
something.’

‘Thumbs down for any kind of emergency. Arm held straight out for a big
fish. Thumbs up means “I understand” or “Coming to help you”. That’s all
you’ll need.’ Bond smiled. ‘If the feet go up, that’s the signal that
you’ve had it.’

The men laughed various kinds of laugh.

There came the sudden voice of the PA System. ‘Swimming party to the
escape hatch. I repeat, swimming party to the escape hatch. Don
equipment. Don equipment. Commander Bond to the Attack Centre, please.’

The whine of the engines died to a moan and then was silent. There was a
slight bump as the _Manta_ hit bottom.




                                   23


                            _Naked Warfare_

Bond shot upwards out of the escape hatch in a blast of compressed air.
Far above him the surface of the sea was a glittering plate of
quicksilver bubbling and swirling with the small waves that Bond was
glad to see had materialized. The balloon of air rushed on past him and
he watched it hit the silver ceiling like a small bomb. There was a
sharp pain in his ears. To get decompression he fought with his fins and
slowed down until he hung suspended ten feet below the surface. Below
him the long black shape of the _Manta_ looked sinister and dangerous.
He thought of the electric light blazing inside her and a hundred men
going about their business. It gave him a creepy feeling. Now there came
a great explosion from the escape hatch as if the _Manta_ was firing at
Bond and the black projectile of Leiter shot up at him through the burst
of silver air-bubbles. Bond moved out of his path and swam on up to the
surface. Cautiously he looked above the small flurry of the waves. The
_Disco_, still blacked out, lay stopped less than a mile away to his
left. There were no signs of activity on board. A mile to the north lay
the long dark outline of Grand Bahama edged with the white of sand and
small waves. There were small patches of broken white on the coral and
niggerheads in the intervening water. Above the island, on top of the
tall rocket gantries that showed as indistinct black skeletons, the red
aircraft warning lights winked on and off. Bond got his bearings and
quietly jack-knifed his body down below the surface. He stopped at about
ten feet and, keeping his body pointed like a compass needle along the
course he would have to follow, lay, paddling softly with his fins to
keep position, and waited for the rest of his team.

                                   ★

Ten minutes before, Commander Pedersen’s stolid calm had given way to
controlled excitement. ‘By gum, it’s working out like you said it
would!’ he had said wonderingly when Bond came into the attack centre.
‘They hove to just about ten minutes ago, and since then the Sonar keeps
on picking up odd noises, underwater noises, just what one would expect
if they were getting things mobilized in that underwater compartment of
theirs. Nothing else to go on, but it’s quite enough. I guess you and
the boys had better get going. As soon as you’re out of the way, I’m
going to float up a surface antenna and get a signal off to Navy
Department, give them a Sitrep and have the missile station warned to
stand by to evacuate if things go wrong. Then I’m going to come up to
twenty feet or so and have two tubes loaded and keep a periscope watch.
I’m issuing Petty Officer Fallon with a second flare. I’ve told him to
keep out of trouble as much as he can and be ready to let off the second
flare if it looks as if things are going really bad for our side.
Unlikely, but I can’t take chances with things as they are. If that
second flare comes up, I’m going to close in. Knock a piece or two off
the _Disco_ with the 4-inch and then board her. Then I’m going to be
rough as hell until that bomb’s been recovered and rendered safe.’ The
captain shook his head doubtfully. He ran his hand over the black iron
filings of his crew-cut. ‘This is one hell of a situation, Commander.
We’ll just have to play it by ear.’ He held out his hand. ‘Well. You’d
better get going. Good luck. I hope my boys’ll be a credit to the ship.’

Bond felt a tap on his shoulder. It was Leiter. He grinned through his
mask and jerked up a thumb. Bond took a quick look behind him. The men
lay spread out in a rough wedge, their fins and hands working slowly as
they marked time in the water. Bond nodded and got going, moving forward
with a slow, even trudge, one hand at his side and the other holding his
spear up the shaft against his chest. Behind him, the black wedge fanned
out into formation and cruised forward like some giant delta-winged
stingray on the prowl.

It was hot and sticky inside the black suit and the recirculating oxygen
coming through the mouthpiece tasted of rubber, but Bond forgot the
discomfort as he concentrated on keeping an even pace and a dead steady
course on a prominent niggerhead with waves washing its head that he had
chosen as a fix for his first contact with the shoal waters.

Far below, where the dancing moon shadows could not penetrate, the
bottom was even white sand with an occasional dark patch that would be
seagrass. All around there was nothing but the great pale luminous hall
of the sea at night, a vast lonely mist through which, against his will
and his intelligence, Bond expected at any moment the dark torpedo of a
great fish to materialize, its eyes and senses questing towards the
rippling shape of the black intruder. But there was nothing, and nothing
came, and gradually the patches of seagrass became more distinct and
ripples showed on the sandy bottom as it shelved slowly up from fifty to
forty and then to thirty feet.

To reassure himself that all was well, Bond took a quick glance over his
shoulder. Yes, they were all there, the oval panes of eleven gleaming
masks with the fluttering fins kicking up behind them and the glint of
the moonlight on the blades of the spears. Bond thought, By God, if only
we can achieve surprise! What a terrifying ambush to meet coming at you
through the shadows and shapes of the reef! His heart lifted momentarily
at the thought, only to be checked by the deep gnawing of his hidden
fears about the girl. Supposing she was part of the enemy team!
Supposing he came face to face with her. Would he bring himself to do
it—with the spear? But the whole idea was ridiculous. She was on board,
safe. He would be seeing her again soon, as soon as this work was done.

A small coral clump showed up below and refocused his mind. Now he gazed
watchfully ahead. There were more clumps, the ink splashes of sea eggs,
crowds of small glittering reef fish, a small forest of sea fans that
beckoned and waved with the ebb and flow like the hair of drowned women.
Bond slowed and felt Leiter or Fallon bump into his fins. He made the
slowing signal with his free hand. Now he crept carefully forward,
looking for the silvery wash of the waves against the top of his
navigation mark. Yes, it was there, away to the left. He was a good
twenty feet off course. He swerved towards it, gave the halt signal and
came slowly up under its protection. With infinite caution he raised his
head through the sucking waves. He glanced first towards the _Disco_.
Yes, she was still there, showing more plainly with the moon now full on
her. No sign of life. Bond inched his gaze slowly across the intervening
sea. Nothing. A flurry of wavelets down the mirrored pathway of the
moon. Now Bond slid round to the other side of the coral head. Nothing
but the broken waters of the shoal and, five or six hundred yards away,
the clear coastline and the beach. Bond searched the clear channels for
unusual turbulence in the water, for shapes, for anything moving. What
was that? A hundred yards away, on the edge of a big patch, almost a
lagoon, of clear water amongst the coral, a head, a pale head with the
glitter of a mask across it, had broken the surface for an instant,
taken a quick look round and immediately submerged.

Bond held his breath. He could feel his thrilled heart hammering against
the inside of his rubber suit. Feeling stifled, he took the breathing
tube from between his teeth and let his breath burst out of him. He
quickly gulped in some mouthfuls of fresh air, got a good fix on the
position, crammed the tube roughly between his lips and slid back and
down.

Behind, the masks gazed blankly at him, waiting for a signal. Bond
jerked up his thumb several times. Through the near masks he could see
the answering flash of teeth. Bond shifted his grasp on the spear down
to an attacking position and surged forward over the low coral.

Now it was only a question of speed and careful navigation among the
occasional higher outcrops. Fish squirted out of his path and all the
reef seemed to waken with the shock-wave of the twelve hastening bodies.
Fifty yards on, Bond signalled to slow, to fan out in the attacking
line. Then he crept on again, his eyes, aching and bloodshot with the
strain, boring ahead through the jagged shapes amongst the pale mist.
Yes! There was the glitter of white flesh, and there and there. Bond’s
arm made the hurling signal for the attack. He plunged forward, his
spear held in front of him like a lance.

Bond’s group came in from the flank. It was a mistake, as Bond quickly
saw, for the SPECTRE team was still moving forward and at a speed that
surprised Bond until he saw the small whirring propellers on the backs
of the enemy. Largo’s men were wearing compressed air speed-packs, bulky
cylinders strapped between the twin cylinders of their aqualungs, that
operated small screws. Combined with the trudge of the fins, this gave
them at least double normal swimming speed in open water, but here,
amongst the broken coral, and slowed by the manoeuvring of the sled
preceded by the electric Chariot, the team was perhaps only a knot
faster than Bond’s group, now thrashing their way forward to an
interception point that was rapidly escaping them. And there were the
hell of a lot of the enemy. Bond stopped counting after twelve. And most
of them carried CO2 guns with extra spears in quivers strapped to their
legs. The odds were bad. If only he could get within spear range before
the alarm was given!

Thirty yards, twenty. Bond glanced behind him. There were six of his men
almost at arm’s length, the rest straggled out in a crooked line. Still
the masks of Largo’s men pointed forward. Still they hadn’t seen the
black shapes making for them through the coral. But now, when Bond was
level with Largo’s rearguard, the moon threw his shadow forward across a
pale patch of sand and one man, then another, glanced quickly round.
Bond got a foot against a lump of coral and, with this to give him
impetus, flung himself forward. The man had no time to defend himself.
Bond’s spear caught him in the side and hurled him against the next man
in line. Bond thrust and wrenched sickeningly. The man dropped his gun
and bent double, clutching his side. Bond bored on into the mass of
naked men now scattering in all directions, with their jet packs
accelerated. Another man went down in front of him, clawing at his face.
A chance thrust of Bond’s had smashed the glass of his mask. He threshed
his way up towards the surface, kicking Bond in the face as he went. A
spear ripped into the rubber protecting Bond’s stomach and Bond felt
pain and wetness that might be blood or sea-water. He dodged another
flash of metal and a gun butt hit him hard on the head, but with most of
its force spent against the cushion of water. It knocked him silly and
he clung for a moment to a niggerhead to get his bearings while the
black tide of his men swept past him and individual fights filled the
water with black puffs of blood.

The battleground had now shifted to a wide expanse of clear water
fringed with broken coral. On the far side of this, Bond saw the
grounded sled laden with something long and bulky with a rubber
covering, the silver torpedo of the Chariot, and a close group of men
that included the unmistakable, oversize figure of Largo. Bond melted
back among the coral clumps, got close down to the sand and began to
swim cautiously round the flank of the big clear pool. Almost
immediately he had to stop. A squat figure was cowering in the shadows.
His gun was raised and he was taking careful aim. It was at Leiter, in
difficulties with one of Largo’s men who had him by the throat while
Leiter, the swim fin on his hook gone, clawed with the hook at the man’s
back. Bond gave two hard kicks of his flippers and hurled his spear from
six feet. The light wood of the handle had no momentum, but the blade
cut into the man’s arm just as the bubbles of gas burst from the muzzle
of the gun. His shot went wide, but he flashed round and thrust at Bond
with the empty gun. Out of the corner of his eye Bond saw his spear
floating slowly up towards the surface. He dived for the man’s legs in a
clumsy rugby tackle and clawed them off the ground. Then, as the gun
muzzle hit him on the temple, he reached a desperate hand for the
enemy’s mask and ripped it off his face. That was enough. Bond swam
aside and watched the man, blinded by the salt water, groping his way up
towards the surface. Bond felt a nudge at his arm. It was Leiter,
clutching at his oxygen tube. His face inside the mask was contorted. He
made a feeble gesture upwards. Bond got the message. He seized Leiter
round the waist and leaped for the surface fifteen feet up. As they
broke through the silver ceiling, Leiter tore the broken tube from his
mouth and gulped frantically for air. Bond held him through the paroxysm
and then guided him to a clump of shallow coral and when Leiter pushed
him angrily away and told him to get the hell back under and leave him
alone, he put up a thumb and dived down again.

Now he kept well in the forest of coral and began again his stalk of
Largo. Occasionally he caught glimpses of individual battles and once he
passed under a man, one of his men from the _Manta_, staring down at him
from the surface. But the face under the water, framed in its streaming
hair, had no mask or oxygen tube, and the mouth gaped hideously in
death. On the bottom, among the coral clumps, there were bits of wrack
from the tide of battle—an oxygen pack, strips of black rubber, a
complete aqualung and several spears from the CO2 guns. Bond picked up
two of them. Now he was on the edge of the open lagoon of battle water.
The sled, with its obscene rubber sausage, was still there, guarded by
two of Largo’s men with their guns at the ready. But there was no sign
of Largo. Bond peered into the misty wall through which the moonlight,
paler now, filtered down on to the ripples in the sand, their pretty
patterns scuffed and churned by the feet of the combatants. Where the
sand had been disturbed, reef fish were swarming to pick up minute
fragments of algae and other fodder, like seagulls and rooks when the
plough has passed. There was nothing else to be seen and there was no
way for Bond to guess how the battle, dispersed into a dozen separate
running fights, was going. What was happening on the surface? When Bond
had taken Leiter up, the sea had been lit by the red flare. How soon
would the rescue dinghy from the _Manta_ be on the scene? Ought he to
stay where he was and watch over the bomb?

With frightening suddenness, the decision was made for him. Out of the
mists to Bond’s right the gleaming torpedo shape of the electric Chariot
shot into the arena. Largo sat astride it in the saddle. He was bent
down behind the small perspex shield to get extra speed and his left
hand held two of the _Manta_ spears pointing forward while he controlled
the single joystick with his right. As he appeared, the two guards
dropped their guns on the sand and held up the coupling of the sled.
Largo slowed down and drifted up to them. One man caught the rudder and
wrestled to pull the Chariot backwards towards the couplings. They were
going to get out! Largo was going to take the bomb back out through the
reef and drop it in deep water or bury it! The same thing would be done
with the second bomb in the _Disco_. With the evidence gone, Largo would
say that he had been ambushed by rival treasure hunters. How was he to
know they came from a United States submarine? His men had fought back
with their shark guns, but only because they had been attacked first.
Once again the treasure hunt cover would hide everything!

The men were still wrestling with the coupling. Largo was looking back
anxiously. Bond measured the distance and flung himself forward with a
great kick against the coral.

Largo turned in time to fling up an arm and parry Bond’s stab with his
right-hand spear and Bond’s stab with the left rattled harmlessly off
the aqualung cylinders on Largo’s back. Bond drove on head first, his
hands outstretched for the air tube in Largo’s mouth. Largo’s hands
flashed to protect himself, dropping his two spears and jerking back the
joystick he had been holding in his right. The Chariot surged forward
away from the two guards and shot obliquely upwards towards the surface
while the two bodies clung and struggled on its back.

It was impossible to fight scientifically. Both men tore vaguely at each
other while their teeth clenched desperately on the rubber mouthpieces
that were their lifelines, but Largo had a firm grip of the Chariot
between his knees while Bond had to use one hand to hang on to Largo’s
equipment to prevent himself being thrown. Again and again Largo’s elbow
crashed into Bond’s face while Bond dodged from side to side to take the
blows on the mouth and not on the precious glass of his mask. At the
same time Bond hammered with his free hand at his only target, Largo’s
kidneys, beneath the brown square of flesh that was all he could reach.

The Chariot broke surface fifty yards down the wide channel leading to
the open sea and tore crazily on, its nose, tilted by Bond’s weight over
the tail, sticking at forty-five degrees out of the water. Now Bond was
half in the wash and it would only be minutes before Largo managed to
twist and get both hands to him. Bond made up his mind. He let go of
Largo’s aqualung and, clutching the stern of the torpedo between his
legs, slid back until he felt the top of the rudder at his back. Now, if
he could avoid the screw! He reached one hand down between his legs, got
a firm grip of the rudder, and heaved himself backwards and off the
machine. Now his face, inches away from the whirring propeller, was
buffeted by the turbulence, but he dragged hard downwards and felt the
stern coming with him. Soon the damned thing would be almost upright.
Bond wrenched the blade of the rudder sideways in a right-angled turn
and then, his arms almost torn out of their sockets by the strain, let
go. Above and in front of him, as the torpedo veered right-handed,
Largo’s body, thrown by the sharp turn and the change of balance,
crashed into the water, twisted quickly over and faced downwards, the
mask searching for Bond.

Bond was beat, utterly defeated by exhaustion. Now there was nothing for
him but to get away and somehow stay alive. The bomb was immobilized,
the Chariot gone, careering in circles over the sea. Largo was finished.
Bond summoned the remains of his strength and sluggishly dived down
towards his last hope, a refuge among the coral.

Almost lazily, Largo, his strength unimpaired, came down after him,
swimming in a giant, easy crawl. Bond swerved in among the coral heads.
A white sand passage showed up and he followed it, then there was a
fork. Bond, trusting to the small extra protection of his rubber suit,
followed the narrower lane between the sharp clumps. But now a black
shadow was above him, following him. Largo had not bothered to get into
the channel. He was swimming above the coral, looking down, watching
Bond, biding his time. Bond looked up. There was a gleam of teeth round
the mouthpiece. Largo knew he had got him. Bond flexed his fingers to
get more life into them. How could he hope to defeat those great hands,
those hands that were machine-tools?

And now the narrow passage was widening. There was the glint of a sandy
channel ahead. There was no room for Bond to turn round. He could only
swim on into the open trap. Bond stopped and stood. It was the only
thing to do. Largo had him like a rat in a trap. But at least Largo
would have to come in and get him. Bond looked upwards. Yes, the great
gleaming body, followed by its string of silver bubbles, was forging
carefully on into the open water. Now, swiftly, like a pale seal, he
dived down to the firm sand and stood facing Bond. Slowly he advanced
between the walls of coral, the big hands held forward for the first
hold. At ten paces he stopped. His eyes swivelled sideways to a coral
clump. His right hand shot out at something and gave a quick yank. When
the hand pulled back, it was writhing, writhing with eight more fingers.
Largo held the baby octopus in front of him like a small, waving flower.
His teeth drew away from the rubber mouthpiece and the clefts of a smile
appeared in his cheeks. He put up one hand and significantly tapped his
mask. Bond bent down and picked up a rock covered with seaweed. Largo
was being melodramatic. A rock in Largo’s mask would be more efficient
than having an octopus slapped across his. Bond wasn’t worried by the
octopus. Only a day before he had been in company with a hundred of
them. It was Largo’s longer reach that worried him.

Largo took a pace forward and then another. Bond crouched, backing
carefully, so as not to cut his rubber skin, into the narrow passage.
Largo came on, slowly, deliberately. In two more paces he would attack.

Bond caught a glint of movement out in the open behind Largo. Someone to
the rescue? But the glint was white, not black. It was one of theirs!

Largo leaped forward.

Bond kicked off the coral and dived down for Largo’s groin, the jagged
rock in his hand. But Largo was ready. His knee came up hard against
Bond’s head and at the same time his right hand came swiftly down and
clamped the small octopus across Bond’s mask. Then from above, both his
hands came down and got Bond by the neck, lifted him up like a child and
held him at arm’s length, pressing.

Bond could see nothing. Vaguely he felt the slimy tentacles groping over
his face, getting a grip of the mouthpiece between his teeth, pulling.
But the blood was roaring in his head and he knew he was gone.

Slowly he sank to his knees. But how, why was he sinking? What had
happened to the hands at his throat? His eyes, squeezed tight in agony,
opened and there was light. The octopus, now at his chest, let go and
shot away among the coral. In front of him Largo, Largo with a spear
sticking horribly through his neck, lay kicking feebly on the sand.
Behind him and looking down at the body, stood a small, pale figure
fitting another spear into an underwater gun. The long hair flowed round
her head like a veil in the luminous sea.

Bond got slowly to his feet. He took a step forward. Suddenly he felt
his knees beginning to give. A wave of blackness began to creep up over
his vision. He leant against the coral, his mouth slackening round the
oxygen tube. Water seeped into his mouth. No! he said to himself. No!
Don’t let that happen!

A hand took one of his. But Domino’s eyes behind her mask were somewhere
else. They were blank, lost. She was ill! What was the matter with her?
Bond was suddenly awake again. His eyes took in the blood patches on her
bathing dress, the angry red marks on her body between the scraps of
bikini. They would both die, standing there, unless he did something
about it. Slowly his leaden legs began to stir the black fins. They were
moving up. It wasn’t so difficult after all. And now, vaguely, her own
fins were helping.

The two bodies reached the surface together and lay, face downwards, in
the shallow troughs of the waves.

The oyster light of dawn slowly turned pink. It was going to be a
beautiful day.




                                   24


                       ‘_Take it easy, Mr Bond_’

Felix Leiter came into the white, antiseptic room and closed the door
conspiratorially behind him. He came and stood beside the bed where Bond
lay on the edge of drugged sleep. ‘How’s it going, feller?’

‘Not bad. Just doped.’

‘Doctor said I wasn’t to see you. But I thought you might care to hear
the score. Okay?’

‘Sure.’ Bond struggled to concentrate. He didn’t really care. All he
could think about was the girl.

‘Well, I’ll make it quick. Doctor’s just doing his rounds and I’ll get
hell if he finds me here. They’ve recovered both bombs, and Kotze—the
physicist chap—is singing like a bird. Seems SPECTRE’s a bunch of
really big-time hoodlums—ex-operators of SMERSH, the Mafia, the
Gestapo—all the big outfits. Headquarters in Paris. Top man’s called
Blofeld, but the bastard got away—or anyway they haven’t caught up with
him yet, according to CIA. Probably Largo’s radio silence warned him.
Must be quite a Mister Genius. Kotze says SPECTRE’s banked millions of
dollars since they got going five or six years ago. This job was going
to be the final haul. We were right about Miami. It _was_ going to be
Target No 2. Same sort of operation. They were going to plant the second
bomb in the yacht basin.’

Bond smiled weakly. ‘So now everybody’s happy.’

‘Oh sure. Except me. Haven’t been able to get away from my damned radio
until now. Valves were almost blowing. And there’s a pile of cipher
stuff from M just longing for you to get around to it. Thank God the top
brass from CIA and a team from your outfit are flying in this evening to
take charge. Then we can hand over and watch our two Governments getting
snarled up over the epilogue—what to tell the public, what to do with
these SPECTRE guys, whether to make you a lord or a duke, how to
persuade me to run for President—tricky little details like that. And
then we’ll damned well get away and have ourselves a ball some place.
Maybe you’d care to take that girl along? Hell, she’s the one that rates
the medals! The guts! They cottoned on to her Geiger counter. God knows
what that bastard Largo did to her. But she didn’t sing—not a damned
word! Then, when the team was under way, she somehow got herself out of
the cabin porthole, with her gun and aqualung, and went to get him. Got
him, and saved your life into the bargain! I swear I’ll never call a
girl “frail” again—not an Italian girl anyway.’ Leiter cocked an ear.
He moved swiftly to the door. ‘Hell, there’s that damned medic
gumshoeing down the corridor! Be seeing you, James.’ He quickly turned
the door handle, listened for a moment, and slipped out of the room.

Feebly, desperately, Bond called, ‘Wait! Felix! Felix!’ But the door had
closed. Bond sank back and lay staring at the ceiling. Slowly anger
boiled up inside him—and panic. Why in hell didn’t someone tell him
about the girl? What the hell did he care about all the rest? Was she
all right? Where was she? Was she . . .

The door opened. Bond jerked himself upright. He shouted furiously at
the white-coated figure. ‘The girl. How is she? Quick! Tell me!’

Dr Stengel, the fashionable doctor of Nassau, was not only fashionable
but a good doctor. He was one of the Jewish refugee doctors who, but for
Hitler, would have been looking after some big hospital in a town the
size of Düsseldorf. Instead, rich and grateful patients had built a
modern clinic for him in Nassau where he treated the natives for
shillings and the millionaires and their wives for ten guineas a visit.
He was more used to handling overdoses of sleeping pills and the
ailments of the rich and old than multiple abrasions, curare poisoning
and odd wounds that looked more as if they belonged to the days of the
pirates. But these were Government orders, and under the Official
Secrets Act at that. Dr Stengel hadn’t asked any questions about his
patients, nor about the sixteen autopsies he had had to perform, six for
Americans from the big submarine, and ten, including the corpse of the
owner, from the fine yacht that had been in harbour for so long.

Now he said carefully, ‘Miss Vitali will be all right. For the moment
she is suffering from shock. She needs rest.’

‘What else? What was the matter with her?’

‘She had swum a long way. She was not in a condition to undertake such a
physical strain.’

‘Why not?’

The doctor moved towards the door. ‘And now you too must rest. You have
been through much. You will take one of those hypnotics once every six
hours. Yes? And plenty of sleep. You will soon be on your feet again.
But for some time you must take it easy, Mr Bond.’

Take it easy. You must take it easy, Mr Bond. Where had he heard those
idiotic words before? Suddenly Bond was raging with fury. He lurched out
of bed. In spite of the sudden giddiness, he staggered towards the
doctor. He shook a fist in the urbane face—urbane because the doctor
was used to the emotional storms of patients, and because he knew that
in minutes the strong soporific would put Bond out for hours. ‘Take it
easy! God damn you! What do you know about taking it easy? Tell me
what’s the matter with that girl! Where is she? What’s the number of her
room?’ Bond’s hands fell limply to his sides. He said feebly, ‘For God’s
sake tell me, Doctor. I, I need to know.’

Doctor Stengel said patiently, kindly, ‘Someone has ill-treated her. She
is suffering from burns—many burns. She is still in great pain. But,’
he waved a reassuring hand, ‘inside she is well. She is in the next
room, in No. 4. You may see her, but only for a minute. Then she will
sleep. And so will you. Yes?’ He held open the door.

‘Thank you. Thank you, Doctor.’ Bond walked out of the room with
faltering steps. His blasted legs were beginning to give again. The
doctor watched him go to the door of No 4, watched him open it and close
it again behind him with the exaggerated care of a drunken man. The
doctor went off along the corridor thinking: it won’t do him any harm
and it may do her some good. It is what she needs—some tenderness.

Inside the small room, the jalousies threw bands of light and shadow
over the bed. Bond staggered over to the bed and knelt down beside it.
The small head on the pillow turned towards him. A hand came out and
grasped his hair, pulling his head closer to her. Her voice said
huskily, ‘You are to stay here. Do you understand? You are not to go
away.’

When Bond didn’t answer, she feebly shook his head to and fro. ‘Do you
hear me, James? Do you understand?’ She felt Bond’s body slipping to the
floor. When she let go his hair, he slumped down on the rug beside her
bed. She carefully shifted her position and looked down at him. He was
already asleep with his head cradled on the inside of his forearm.

The girl watched the dark, rather cruel face for a moment. Then she gave
a small sigh, pulled the pillow to the edge of the bed so that it was
just above him, laid her head down so that she could see him whenever
she wanted to, and closed her eyes.




                         THESE  ARE  PAN  BOOKS

=Ian Fleming=
=THE DIAMOND SMUGGLERS=

A master thriller-writer tells the true story of the fight against a web
of intrigue which covered two continents—as richly fascinating as any
_James Bond_ thriller.

_Illustrated_                                                      (2/6)

=Ian Fleming=
=THRILLING CITIES Part One=

From Hong Kong to New York—an off-beat, exciting tour of the flesh-pots
of Far Asia and America that explores the places where tourists rarely
venture and guide-books daren’t describe! ‘Supremely readable’—_Sunday
Times_ ‘This is James Bond’s world’—_Daily Telegraph._

_Illustrated_                                                      (3/6)

=E. V. Cunningham=
=SYLVIA=

First of a brilliant new suspense series by a novelist of international
repute. The story of a detective whose assignment to unravel the Jekyll
and Hyde past of a beautiful woman grows ever more dramatic.

                                                                   (3/6)

=E. V. Cunningham=
=PHYLLIS=

A hoax? Or the most appalling threat yet faced by the world?
‘Brilliantly written . . . the climax is magnificent: it crowns an
outstandingly intelligent and thrilling story’—_The Bookman_

                                                                   (2/6)

=Hillary Waugh=
=ROAD BLOCK=

A payroll robbery and its aftermath of terror and suspense. This dynamic
thriller re-introduces Police Chief Fellows in a brittle drama marked by
brilliant police work. ‘Tension rises in a steady curve from the first
page to the last’—_Guardian_.

                                                                   (2/6)

=Hillary Waugh=
=JIGSAW=

A deserted house, a trunk in the cellar, in the trunk a woman’s torso.
The police have only one suspect—whom no one has ever seen. The
solution is a knockout, with a subtle ‘extra’ for the final curtain. Now
filmed, starring Jack Warner.

                                                                   (2/6)

=Hillary Waugh=
=LAST SEEN WEARING=

Reader’s report: ‘The best detective novel I have read during my years
with Pan. Has everything: suspense, shocks, false alarms, good dialogue.
If it isn’t a Pan, I give up.’

                                                                   (2/6)

=Hillary Waugh=
=THAT NIGHT IT RAINED=

In a little town in Connecticut, someone was brutally murdered on a
rainy night. Police inquiries bring about a startling climax to a
grisly, gripping tale. ‘Compellingly readable’—Francis Iles in the
_Guardian_. ‘Suspense admirably maintained’—_Sunday Telegraph_.

                                                                   (3/6)

=Alan Hunter=
=GENTLY GO MAN=

Murder among the ‘ton-up’ boys. Gently goes into the world of ‘beats’
and irresponsible delinquents to tangle with a far from ordinary killer.
‘You shouldn’t miss it’—_Sunday Times_

                                                                   (2/6)

=Alan Hunter=
=GENTLY WITH THE PAINTERS=

Superintendent Gently, faced with a bewildering array of suspects, has
to discover who stabbed a pretty, tantalizing young artist. ‘Alan Hunter
is our native rival to Simenon’—_Time and Tide_

                                                                   (2/6)

=Alan Hunter=
=GENTLY WHERE THE ROADS GO=

They found him in the driving-seat of a van, parked in a lay-by. He had
been made unrecognizable by the savage use of a Sten gun. All that
Superintendent Gently had to go on, when he arrived, was an
identification . . . ‘The best yet’—_Sunday Times_

                                                                   (2/6)

=Kendal Young=
=THE RAVINE=

In the shadowy, malignant depths of the ravine two bestial crimes had
already been committed. Now a trap had been baited for the killer. An
almost foolproof trap . . .

                                                                   (2/6)

=Shelley Smith=
=BALLAD OF THE RUNNING MAN=

Heart-stopping story of an audacious insurance fraud which involved a
husband and wife in murder. Holds the reader to the very last line.

                                                                   (2/6)

=Erskine Childers=
=THE RIDDLE OF THE SANDS=

The classic secret service and adventure story that set a new standard
for atmosphere and suspense. A superb blend of Conrad and Buchan.

                                                                   (3/6)

=Paul Gallico=
=TRIAL BY TERROR=

Why had an apparently innocent compatriot made a phoney confession to
the Communists? An American journalist rushes to Hungary to find out, is
arrested and tortured. Then the answer becomes clear.

                                                                   (2/6)

=Algernon Blackwood=
=THE DANCE OF DEATH=

Six strange tales of the unknown and inexplicable—chilling and macabre,
each stamped by the unique story-telling hallmark of its famous author.

                                                                   (2/6)

=Alexander Fullerton=
=THE WAITING GAME=

A lone submarine on a desperate mission—trapped beneath the icy glare
of the midnight sun. A tense novel of war at sea by the best-selling
author of _Surface!_ ‘Reads like exciting fact’—_Manchester Evening
News_.

                                                                   (3/6)

=Charles Williams=
=THE SAILCLOTH SHROUD=

Another superb thriller from ‘one of the best of all specialists in
suspense’—_New York Times_. ‘Action not only fast but perfectly
credible’—_John O’London’s_.

                                                                   (2/6)

=Lady Cynthia Asquith=
=THE SECOND GHOST BOOK=

L. A. G. Strong, Nancy Spain, L. P. Hartley, Elizabeth Bowen, Walter de
la Mare . . . in all 20 distinguished British authors have contributed
stories to this new collection. ‘Each story defies your hair not to
rise, your flesh not to creep’—_Time and Tide_.

                                                                   (2/6)

=Lady Cynthia Asquith=
=THE THIRD GHOST BOOK=

Stories that will take you in a cold embrace—27 startling tales of the
tormented and the damned. Here are ghosts of every kind and in every
mood: ghosts human; ghosts animal; ghosts tender; ghosts vindictive.
Superbly written and deliciously hair-raising.

                                                                   (2/6)

=Edgar Allan Poe=
=TALES OF MYSTERY AND=
    =IMAGINATION=

Ten selected stories from an unrivalled classic of the gruesome and the
macabre, five of which are now filmed or filming.

                                                                   (2/6)

=ALFRED HITCHCOCK PRESENTS=

A sinister collection of twenty-five spine-chilling stories, which ‘they
wouldn’t let me do on TV’. Here are stories, by famous authors, so
grotesque and terrifying that they ‘would not only send the viewers
screaming up the walls but would probably qualify the cast for a
strait-jacket’—BBC.

                                                                   (3/6)




                           TRANSCRIBER NOTES

Misspelled words and printer errors have been corrected. Where multiple
spellings occur, majority use has been employed.

Punctuation has been maintained except where obvious printer errors
occur.

[The end of _Thunderball_ by Ian Fleming]
