=* A Distributed Proofreaders Canada eBook *=

This ebook is made available at no cost and with very few restrictions.
These restrictions apply only if (1) you make a change in the ebook
(other than alteration for different display devices), or (2) you are
making commercial use of the ebook. If either of these conditions
applies, please contact a FP administrator before proceeding.

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be under copyright
in some countries. If you live outside Canada, check your country's
copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER COPYRIGHT IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT
DOWNLOAD OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE.

_Title:_ The Edge of the Sea
_Date of first publication:_ 1955
_Author:_ Rachel Carson (1907-1964)
_Date first posted:_ Oct. 25, 2016
_Date last updated:_ Oct. 25, 2016
Faded Page eBook #20161022

This ebook was produced by: Al Haines, Cindy Beyer & the online
Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net




    Transcriber's note: Because of copyright considerations, the
    illustrations by Bob Hines (1912-1994) have been omitted from
    this ebook.




                                The Edge
                               of the Sea

                            by Rachel Carson



                                1 9 5 5

                              B O S T O N
            H O U G H T O N   M I F F L I N   C O M P A N Y




              B O O K S   B Y   R A C H E L   C A R S O N

                   T H E   S E A   A R O U N D   U S
                  U N D E R   T H E   S E A   W I N D
                 T H E   E D G E   O F   T H E   S E A

                     First printing September 1955

               TEXT COPYRIGHT © 1955 BY RACHEL L. CARSON
           ILLUSTRATIONS COPYRIGHT © 1955 BY ROBERT W. HINES
          ALL RIGHTS RESERVED INCLUDING THE RIGHT TO REPRODUCE
                 THIS BOOK OR PARTS THEREOF IN ANY FORM
          LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGUE CARD NUMBER: 54-10759
         PARTS OF THIS BOOK FIRST APPEARED IN _The New Yorker_
                         =The Riverside Press=
                       CAMBRIDGE • MASSACHUSETTS
                         PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.




                            Acknowledgments

OUR UNDERSTANDING of the nature of the shore and of the lives of sea
animals has been acquired through the labor of many hundreds of people,
some of whom have devoted a lifetime to the study of a single group of
animals. In my researches for this book I have been deeply conscious of
the debt of gratitude we owe these men and women, whose toil allows us
to sense the wholeness of life as it is lived by many of the creatures
of the shore. I am even more immediately aware of my debt to those I
have consulted personally, comparing observations, seeking advice and
information and always finding it freely and generously given. It is
impossible to express my thanks to all these people by name, but a few
must have special mention. Several members of the staff of the United
States National Museum have not only settled many of my questions but
have given invaluable advice and assistance to Bob Hines in his
preparation of the drawings. For this help we are especially grateful to
R. Tucker Abbott, Frederick M. Bayer, Fenner Chace, the late Austin H.
Clark, Harald Rehder, and Leonard Schultz. Dr. W. N. Bradley of the
United States Geological Survey has been my friendly advisor on
geological matters, answering many questions and critically reading
portions of the manuscript. Professor William Randolph Taylor of the
University of Michigan has responded instantly and cheerfully to my
calls for aid in identifying marine algae, and Professor and Mrs. T. A.
Stephenson of the University College of Wales, whose work on the ecology
of the shore has been especially stimulating, have advised and
encouraged me in correspondence. To Professor Henry B. Bigelow of
Harvard University I am everlastingly in debt for encouragement and
friendly counsel over many years. The grant of a Guggenheim Fellowship
helped finance the first year of study in which the foundations of this
book were laid, and some of the field work that has taken me along the
tide lines from Maine to Florida.




                                Preface

LIKE THE SEA ITSELF, the shore fascinates us who return to it, the place
of our dim ancestral beginnings. In the recurrent rhythms of tides and
surf and in the varied life of the tide lines there is the obvious
attraction of movement and change and beauty. There is also, I am
convinced, a deeper fascination born of inner meaning and significance.

When we go down to the low tide line, we enter a world that is as old as
the earth itself—the primeval meeting place of the elements of earth
and water, a place of compromise and conflict and eternal change. For us
as living creatures it has special meaning as an area in or near which
some entity that could be distinguished as Life first drifted in shallow
waters—reproducing, evolving, yielding that endlessly varied stream of
living things that has surged through time and space to occupy the
earth.

To understand the shore, it is not enough to catalogue its life.
Understanding comes only when, standing on a beach, we can sense the
long rhythms of earth and sea that sculptured its land forms and
produced the rock and sand of which it is composed; when we can sense
with the eye and ear of the mind the surge of life beating always at its
shores—blindly, inexorably pressing for a foothold. To understand the
life of the shore, it is not enough to pick up an empty shell and say
“This is a murex,” or “That is an angel wing.” True understanding
demands intuitive comprehension of the whole life of the creature that
once inhabited this empty shell: how it survived amid surf and storms,
what were its enemies, how it found food and reproduced its kind, what
were its relations to the particular sea world in which it lived.

The seashores of the world may be divided into three basic types: the
rugged shores of rock, the sand beaches, and the coral reefs and all
their associated features. Each has its typical community of plants and
animals. The Atlantic coast of the United States is one of the few in
the world that provide clear examples of each of these types. I have
chosen it as the setting for my pictures of shore life, although—such
is the universality of the sea world—the broad outlines of the pictures
might apply on many shores of the earth.

I have tried to interpret the shore in terms of that essential unity
that binds life to the earth. In Chapter I, in a series of recollections
of places that have stirred me deeply, I have expressed some of the
thoughts and feelings that make the sea’s edge, for me, a place of
exceeding beauty and fascination. Chapter II introduces as basic themes
the sea forces that will recur again and again throughout the book as
molding and determining the life of the shore: surf, currents, tides,
the very waters of the sea. Chapters III, IV, and V are interpretations,
respectively, of a rocky coast, the sand beaches, and the world of the
coral reefs.

The drawings by Bob Hines have been provided in abundance so the reader
may gain a sense of familiarity with the creatures that move through
these pages, and may also be helped to recognize those he meets in his
own explorations of the shore. For the convenience of those who like to
pigeonhole their findings neatly in the classification schemes the human
mind has devised, an appendix presents the conventional groups, or
phyla, of plants and animals and describes typical examples. Each form
mentioned in the book itself is listed under its Latin as well as its
common name in the index.




                                Contents

                  Preface                                    vii

               I. The Marginal World                           1

              II. Patterns of Shore Life                       9

             III. The Rocky Shores                            39

              IV. The Rim of Sand                            125

               V. The Coral Coast                            191

              VI. The Enduring Sea                           249

                  Appendix: Classification                   251

                  Index                                      271




                     To Dorothy and Stanley Freeman

           who have gone down with me into the low tide world
               and have felt its beauty and its mystery.




                                The Edge
                               of the Sea




                           The Marginal World


THE EDGE of the sea is a strange and beautiful place. All through the
long history of Earth it has been an area of unrest where waves have
broken heavily against the land, where the tides have pressed forward
over the continents, receded, and then returned. For no two successive
days is the shore line precisely the same. Not only do the tides advance
and retreat in their eternal rhythms, but the level of the sea itself is
never at rest. It rises or falls as the glaciers melt or grow, as the
floor of the deep ocean basins shifts under its increasing load of
sediments, or as the earth’s crust along the continental margins warps
up or down in adjustment to strain and tension. Today a little more land
may belong to the sea, tomorrow a little less. Always the edge of the
sea remains an elusive and indefinable boundary.

The shore has a dual nature, changing with the swing of the tides,
belonging now to the land, now to the sea. On the ebb tide it knows the
harsh extremes of the land world, being exposed to heat and cold, to
wind, to rain and drying sun. On the flood tide it is a water world,
returning briefly to the relative stability of the open sea.

Only the most hardy and adaptable can survive in a region so mutable,
yet the area between the tide lines is crowded with plants and animals.
In this difficult world of the shore, life displays its enormous
toughness and vitality by occupying almost every conceivable niche.
Visibly, it carpets the intertidal rocks; or half hidden, it descends
into fissures and crevices, or hides under boulders, or lurks in the wet
gloom of sea caves. Invisibly, where the casual observer would say there
is no life, it lies deep in the sand, in burrows and tubes and
passageways. It tunnels into solid rock and bores into peat and clay. It
encrusts weeds or drifting spars or the hard, chitinous shell of a
lobster. It exists minutely, as the film of bacteria that spreads over a
rock surface or a wharf piling; as spheres of protozoa, small as
pinpricks, sparkling at the surface of the sea; and as Lilliputian
beings swimming through dark pools that lie between the grains of sand.

The shore is an ancient world, for as long as there has been an earth
and sea there has been this place of the meeting of land and water. Yet
it is a world that keeps alive the sense of continuing creation and of
the relentless drive of life. Each time that I enter it, I gain some new
awareness of its beauty and its deeper meanings, sensing that intricate
fabric of life by which one creature is linked with another, and each
with its surroundings.

In my thoughts of the shore, one place stands apart for its revelation
of exquisite beauty. It is a pool hidden within a cave that one can
visit only rarely and briefly when the lowest of the year’s low tides
fall below it, and perhaps from that very fact it acquires some of its
special beauty. Choosing such a tide, I hoped for a glimpse of the pool.
The ebb was to fall early in the morning. I knew that if the wind held
from the northwest and no interfering swell ran in from a distant storm
the level of the sea should drop below the entrance to the pool. There
had been sudden ominous showers in the night, with rain like handfuls of
gravel flung on the roof. When I looked out into the early morning the
sky was full of a gray dawn light but the sun had not yet risen. Water
and air were pallid. Across the bay the moon was a luminous disc in the
western sky, suspended above the dim line of distant shore—the full
August moon, drawing the tide to the low, low levels of the threshold of
the alien sea world. As I watched, a gull flew by, above the spruces.
Its breast was rosy with the light of the unrisen sun. The day was,
after all, to be fair.

Later, as I stood above the tide near the entrance to the pool, the
promise of that rosy light was sustained. From the base of the steep
wall of rock on which I stood, a moss-covered ledge jutted seaward into
deep water. In the surge at the rim of the ledge the dark fronds of
oarweeds swayed, smooth and gleaming as leather. The projecting ledge
was the path to the small hidden cave and its pool. Occasionally a
swell, stronger than the rest, rolled smoothly over the rim and broke in
foam against the cliff. But the intervals between such swells were long
enough to admit me to the ledge and long enough for a glimpse of that
fairy pool, so seldom and so briefly exposed.

And so I knelt on the wet carpet of sea moss and looked back into the
dark cavern that held the pool in a shallow basin. The floor of the cave
was only a few inches below the roof, and a mirror had been created in
which all that grew on the ceiling was reflected in the still water
below.

Under water that was clear as glass the pool was carpeted with green
sponge. Gray patches of sea squirts glistened on the ceiling and
colonies of soft coral were a pale apricot color. In the moment when I
looked into the cave a little elfin starfish hung down, suspended by the
merest thread, perhaps by only a single tube foot. It reached down to
touch its own reflection, so perfectly delineated that there might have
been, not one starfish, but two. The beauty of the reflected images and
of the limpid pool itself was the poignant beauty of things that are
ephemeral, existing only until the sea should return to fill the little
cave.

Whenever I go down into this magical zone of the low water of the spring
tides, I look for the most delicately beautiful of all the shore’s
inhabitants—flowers that are not plant but animal, blooming on the
threshold of the deeper sea. In that fairy cave I was not disappointed.
Hanging from its roof were the pendent flowers of the hydroid Tubularia,
pale pink, fringed and delicate as the wind flower. Here were creatures
so exquisitely fashioned that they seemed unreal, their beauty too
fragile to exist in a world of crushing force. Yet every detail was
functionally useful, every stalk and hydranth and petal-like tentacle
fashioned for dealing with the realities of existence. I knew that they
were merely waiting, in that moment of the tide’s ebbing, for the return
of the sea. Then in the rush of water, in the surge of surf and the
pressure of the incoming tide, the delicate flower heads would stir with
life. They would sway on their slender stalks, and their long tentacles
would sweep the returning water, finding in it all that they needed for
life.

And so in that enchanted place on the threshold of the sea the realities
that possessed my mind were far from those of the land world I had left
an hour before. In a different way the same sense of remoteness and of a
world apart came to me in a twilight hour on a great beach on the coast
of Georgia. I had come down after sunset and walked far out over sands
that lay wet and gleaming, to the very edge of the retreating sea.
Looking back across that immense flat, crossed by winding, water-filled
gullies and here and there holding shallow pools left by the tide, I was
filled with awareness that this intertidal area, although abandoned
briefly and rhythmically by the sea, is always reclaimed by the rising
tide. There at the edge of low water the beach with its reminders of the
land seemed far away. The only sounds were those of the wind and the sea
and the birds. There was one sound of wind moving over water, and
another of water sliding over the sand and tumbling down the faces of
its own wave forms. The flats were astir with birds, and the voice of
the willet rang insistently. One of them stood at the edge of the water
and gave its loud, urgent cry; an answer came from far up the beach and
the two birds flew to join each other.

The flats took on a mysterious quality as dusk approached and the last
evening light was reflected from the scattered pools and creeks. Then
birds became only dark shadows, with no color discernible. Sanderlings
scurried across the beach like little ghosts, and here and there the
darker forms of the willets stood out. Often I could come very close to
them before they would start up in alarm—the sanderlings running, the
willets flying up, crying. Black skimmers flew along the ocean’s edge
silhouetted against the dull, metallic gleam, or they went flitting
above the sand like large, dimly seen moths. Sometimes they “skimmed”
the winding creeks of tidal water, where little spreading surface
ripples marked the presence of small fish.

The shore at night is a different world, in which the very darkness that
hides the distractions of daylight brings into sharper focus the
elemental realities. Once, exploring the night beach, I surprised a
small ghost crab in the searching beam of my torch. He was lying in a
pit he had dug just above the surf, as though watching the sea and
waiting. The blackness of the night possessed water, air, and beach. It
was the darkness of an older world, before Man. There was no sound but
the all-enveloping, primeval sounds of wind blowing over water and sand,
and of waves crashing on the beach. There was no other visible
life—just one small crab near the sea. I have seen hundreds of ghost
crabs in other settings, but suddenly I was filled with the odd
sensation that for the first time I knew the creature in its own
world—that I understood, as never before, the essence of its being. In
that moment time was suspended; the world to which I belonged did not
exist and I might have been an onlooker from outer space. The little
crab alone with the sea became a symbol that stood for life itself—for
the delicate, destructible, yet incredibly vital force that somehow
holds its place amid the harsh realities of the inorganic world.

The sense of creation comes with memories of a southern coast, where the
sea and the mangroves, working together, are building a wilderness of
thousands of small islands off the southwestern coast of Florida,
separated from each other by a tortuous pattern of bays, lagoons, and
narrow waterways. I remember a winter day when the sky was blue and
drenched with sunlight; though there was no wind one was conscious of
flowing air like cold clear crystal. I had landed on the surf-washed tip
of one of those islands, and then worked my way around to the sheltered
bay side. There I found the tide far out, exposing the broad mud flat of
a cove bordered by the mangroves with their twisted branches, their
glossy leaves, and their long prop roots reaching down, grasping and
holding the mud, building the land out a little more, then again a
little more.

The mud flats were strewn with the shells of that small, exquisitely
colored mollusk, the rose tellin, looking like scattered petals of pink
roses. There must have been a colony nearby, living buried just under
the surface of the mud. At first the only creature visible was a small
heron in gray and rusty plumage—a reddish egret that waded across the
flat with the stealthy, hesitant movements of its kind. But other land
creatures had been there, for a line of fresh tracks wound in and out
among the mangrove roots, marking the path of a raccoon feeding on the
oysters that gripped the supporting roots with projections from their
shells. Soon I found the tracks of a shore bird, probably a sanderling,
and followed them a little; then they turned toward the water and were
lost, for the tide had erased them and made them as though they had
never been.

Looking out over the cove I felt a strong sense of the
interchangeability of land and sea in this marginal world of the shore,
and of the links between the life of the two. There was also an
awareness of the past and of the continuing flow of time, obliterating
much that had gone before, as the sea had that morning washed away the
tracks of the bird.

The sequence and meaning of the drift of time were quietly summarized in
the existence of hundreds of small snails—the mangrove
periwinkles—browsing on the branches and roots of the trees. Once their
ancestors had been sea dwellers, bound to the salt waters by every tie
of their life processes. Little by little over the thousands and
millions of years the ties had been broken, the snails had adjusted
themselves to life out of water, and now today they were living many
feet above the tide to which they only occasionally returned. And
perhaps, who could say how many ages hence, there would be in their
descendants not even this gesture of remembrance for the sea.

The spiral shells of other snails—these quite minute—left winding
tracks on the mud as they moved about in search of food. They were horn
shells, and when I saw them I had a nostalgic moment when I wished I
might see what Audubon saw, a century and more ago. For such little horn
shells were the food of the flamingo, once so numerous on this coast,
and when I half closed my eyes I could almost imagine a flock of these
magnificent flame birds feeding in that cove, filling it with their
color. It was a mere yesterday in the life of the earth that they were
there; in nature, time and space are relative matters, perhaps most
truly perceived subjectively in occasional flashes of insight, sparked
by such a magical hour and place.

There is a common thread that links these scenes and memories—the
spectacle of life in all its varied manifestations as it has appeared,
evolved, and sometimes died out. Underlying the beauty of the spectacle
there is meaning and significance. It is the elusiveness of that meaning
that haunts us, that sends us again and again into the natural world
where the key to the riddle is hidden. It sends us back to the edge of
the sea, where the drama of life played its first scene on earth and
perhaps even its prelude; where the forces of evolution are at work
today, as they have been since the appearance of what we know as life;
and where the spectacle of living creatures faced by the cosmic
realities of their world is crystal clear.




                         Patterns of Shore Life


THE EARLY HISTORY of life as it is written in the rocks is exceedingly
dim and fragmentary, and so it is not possible to say when living things
first colonized the shore, nor even to indicate the exact time when life
arose. The rocks that were laid down as sediments during the first half
of the earth’s history, in the Archeozoic era, have since been altered
chemically and physically by the pressure of many thousands of feet of
superimposed layers and by the intense heat of the deep regions to which
they have been confined during much of their existence. Only in a few
places, as in eastern Canada, are they exposed and accessible for study,
but if these pages of the rock history ever contained any clear record
of life, it has long since been obliterated.

The following pages—the rocks of the next several hundred million
years, known as the Proterozoic era—are almost as disappointing. There
are immense deposits of iron, which may possibly have been laid down
with the help of certain algae and bacteria. Other deposits—strange
globular masses of calcium carbonate—seem to have been formed by
lime-secreting algae. Supposed fossils or faint impressions in these
ancient rocks have been tentatively identified as sponges, jellyfish, or
hard-shelled creatures with jointed legs called arthropods, but the more
skeptical or conservative scientists regard these traces as having an
inorganic origin.

Suddenly, following the early pages with their sketchy records, a whole
section of the history seems to have been destroyed. Sedimentary rocks
representing untold millions of years of pre-Cambrian history have
disappeared, having been lost by erosion or possibly, through violent
changes in the surface of the earth, brought into a location that now is
at the bottom of the deep sea. Because of this loss a seemingly
unbridgeable gap in the story of life exists.

The scarcity of fossil records in the early rocks and the loss of whole
blocks of sediments may be linked with the chemical nature of the early
sea and the atmosphere. Some specialists believe that the pre-Cambrian
ocean was deficient in calcium or at least in the conditions that make
easily possible the secretion of calcium shells and skeletons. If so,
its inhabitants must have been for the most part soft-bodied and so not
readily fossilized. A large amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
and its relative deficiency in the sea would also have affected the
weathering of rock, according to geological theory, so that the
sedimentary rocks of pre-Cambrian time must have been repeatedly eroded,
washed away, and newly sedimented, with consequent destruction of
fossils.

When the record is resumed in the rocks of the Cambrian period, which
are about half a billion years old, all the major groups of invertebrate
animals (including the principal inhabitants of the shore) suddenly
appear, fully formed and flourishing. There are sponges and jellyfish,
worms of all sorts, a few simple snail-like mollusks, and arthropods.
Algae also are abundant, although no higher plants appear. But the basic
plan of each of the large groups of animals and plants that now inhabit
the shore had been at least projected in those Cambrian seas, and we may
suppose, on good evidence, that the strip between the tide lines 500
million years ago bore at least a general resemblance to the intertidal
area of the present stage of earth history.

We may suppose also that for at least the preceding half-billion years
those invertebrate groups, so well developed in the Cambrian, had been
evolving from simpler forms, although what they looked like we may never
know. Possibly the larval stages of some of the species now living may
resemble those ancestors whose remains the earth seems to have destroyed
or failed to preserve.

During the hundreds of millions of years since the dawn of the Cambrian,
sea life has continued to evolve. Subdivisions of the original basic
groups have arisen, new species have been created, and many of the early
forms have disappeared as evolution has developed others better fitted
to meet the demands of their world. A few of the primitive creatures of
Cambrian time have representatives today that are little changed from
their early ancestors, but these are the exception. The shore, with its
difficult and changing conditions, has been a testing ground in which
the precise and perfect adaptation to environment is an indispensable
condition of survival.

All the life of the shore—the past and the present—by the very fact of
its existence there, gives evidence that it has dealt successfully with
the realities of its world—the towering physical realities of the sea
itself, and the subtle life relationships that bind each living thing to
its own community. The patterns of life as created and shaped by these
realities intermingle and overlap so that the major design is
exceedingly complex.

Whether the bottom of the shallow waters and the intertidal area
consists of rocky cliffs and boulders, of broad plains of sand, or of
coral reefs and shallows determines the visible pattern of life. A rocky
coast, even though it is swept by surf, allows life to exist openly
through adaptations for clinging to the firm surfaces provided by the
rocks and by other structural provisions for dissipating the force of
the waves. The visible evidence of living things is everywhere about—a
colorful tapestry of seaweeds, barnacles, mussels, and snails covering
the rocks—while more delicate forms find refuge in cracks and crevices
or by creeping under boulders. Sand, on the other hand, forms a
yielding, shifting substratum of unstable nature, its particles
incessantly stirred by the waves, so that few living things can
establish or hold a place on its surface or even in its upper layers.
All have gone below, and in burrows, tubes, and underground chambers the
hidden life of the sands is lived. A coast dominated by coral reefs is
necessarily a warm coast, its existence made possible by warm ocean
currents establishing the climate in which the coral animals can thrive.
The reefs, living or dead, provide a hard surface to which living things
may cling. Such a coast is somewhat like one bordered by rocky cliffs,
but with differences introduced by smothering layers of chalky
sediments. The richly varied tropical fauna of coral coasts has
therefore developed special adaptations that set it apart from the life
of mineral rock or sand. Because the American Atlantic coast includes
examples of all three types of shore, the various patterns of life
related to the nature of the coast itself are displayed there with
beautiful clarity.

Still other patterns are superimposed on the basic geologic ones. The
surf dwellers are different from those who live in quiet waters, even if
members of the same species. In a region of strong tides, life exists in
successive bands or zones, from the high-water mark to the line of the
lowest ebb tides; these zones are obscured where there is little tidal
action or on sand beaches where life is driven underground. The
currents, modifying temperature and distributing the larval stages of
sea creatures, create still another world.

Again the physical facts of the American Atlantic coast are such that
the observer of its life has spread before him, almost with the clarity
of a well-conceived scientific experiment, a demonstration of the
modifying effect of tides, surf, and currents. It happens that the
northern rocks, where life is lived openly, lie in the region of some of
the strongest tides of the world, those within the area of the Bay of
Fundy. Here the zones of life created by the tides have the simple
graphic force of a diagram. The tidal zones being obscured on sandy
shores, one is free there to observe the effect of the surf. Neither
strong tides nor heavy surf visits the southern tip of Florida. Here is
a typical coral coast, built by the coral animals and the mangroves that
multiply and spread in the calm, warm waters—a world whose inhabitants
have drifted there on ocean currents from the West Indies, duplicating
the strange tropical fauna of that region.

And over all these patterns there are others created by the sea water
itself—bringing or withholding food, carrying substances of powerful
chemical nature that, for good or ill, affect the lives of all they
touch. Nowhere on the shore is the relation of a creature to its
surroundings a matter of a single cause and effect; each living thing is
bound to its world by many threads, weaving the intricate design of the
fabric of life.

The problem of breaking waves need not be faced by inhabitants of the
open ocean, for they can sink into deep water to avoid rough seas. An
animal or plant of the shore has no such means of escape. The surf
releases all its tremendous energy as it breaks against the shore,
sometimes delivering blows of almost incredible violence. Exposed coasts
of Great Britain and other eastern Atlantic islands receive some of the
most violent surf in the world, created by winds that sweep across the
whole expanse of ocean. It sometimes strikes with a force of two tons to
the square foot. The American Atlantic coast, being a sheltered shore,
receives no such surf, yet even here the waves of winter storms or of
summer hurricanes have enormous size and destructive power. The island
of Monhegan on the coast of Maine lies unprotected in the path of such
storms and receives their waves on its steep seaward-facing cliffs. In a
violent storm the spray from breaking waves is thrown over the crest of
White Head, about 100 feet above the sea. In some storms the green water
of actual waves sweeps over a lower cliff known as Gull Rock. It is
about 60 feet high.

The effect of waves is felt on the bottom a considerable distance
offshore. Lobster traps set in water nearly 200 feet deep often are
shifted about or have stones carried into them. But the critical
problem, of course, is the one that exists on or very close to the
shore, where waves are breaking. Very few coasts have completely
defeated the attempts of living things to gain a foothold. Beaches are
apt to be barren if they are composed of loose coarse sand that shifts
in the surf and then dries quickly when the tide falls. Others, of firm
sand, though they may look barren, actually sustain a rich fauna in
their deeper layers. A beach composed of many cobblestones that grind
against each other in the surf is an impossible home for most creatures.
But the shore formed of rocky cliffs and ledges, unless the surf be of
extraordinary force, is host to a large and abundant fauna and flora.

Barnacles are perhaps the best example of successful inhabitants of the
surf zone. Limpets do almost as well, and so do the small rock
periwinkles. The coarse brown seaweeds called wracks or rockweeds
possess species that thrive in moderately heavy surf, while others
require a degree of protection. After a little experience one can learn
to judge the exposure of any shore merely by identifying its fauna and
flora. If, for example, there is a broad area covered by the knotted
wrack—a long and slender weed that lies like a tangled mass of cordage
when the tide is out—if this predominates, we know the shore is a
moderately protected one, seldom visited by heavy surf. If, however,
there is little or none of the knotted wrack but instead a zone covered
by a rockweed of much shorter stature, branching repeatedly, its fronds
flattened and tapering at the ends, then we sense more keenly the
presence of the open sea and the crushing power of its surf. For the
forked wrack and other members of a community of low-growing seaweeds
with strong and elastic tissues are sure indicators of an exposed coast
and can thrive in seas the knotted wrack cannot endure. And if, on still
another shore, there is little vegetation of any sort, but instead only
a rock zone whitened by a living snow of barnacles—thousands upon
thousands of them raising their sharp-pointed cones to the smother of
the surf—we may be sure this coast is quite unprotected from the force
of the sea.

The barnacle has two advantages that allow it to succeed where almost
all other life fails to survive. Its low conical shape deflects the
force of the waves and sends the water rolling off harmlessly. The whole
base of the cone, moreover, is fixed to the rock with natural cement of
extraordinary strength; to remove it one has to use a sharp-bladed
knife. And so those twin dangers of the surf zone—the threat of being
washed away and of being crushed—have little reality for the barnacle.
Yet its existence in such a place takes on a touch of the miraculous
when we remember this fact: it was not the adult creature, whose shape
and firmly cemented base are precise adaptations to the surf, that
gained a foothold here; it was the larva. In the turbulence of heavy
seas, the delicate larva had to choose its spot on the wave-washed
rocks, to settle there, and somehow not be washed away during those
critical hours while its tissues were being reorganized in their
transformation to the adult form, while the cement was extruded and
hardened, and the shell plates grew up about the soft body. To
accomplish all this in heavy surf seems to me a far more difficult thing
than is required of the spore of a rockweed; yet the fact remains that
the barnacles can colonize exposed rocks where the weeds are unable to
gain a footing.

The streamlined form has been adopted and even improved upon by other
creatures, some of whom have omitted the permanent attachment to the
rocks. The limpet is one of these—a simple and primitive snail that
wears above its tissues a shell like the hat of a Chinese coolie. From
this smoothly sloping cone the surf rolls away harmlessly; indeed, the
blows of falling water only press down more firmly the suction cup of
fleshy tissue beneath the shell, strengthening its grip on the rock.

Still other creatures, while retaining a smoothly rounded contour, put
out anchor lines to hold their places on the rocks. Such a device is
used by the mussels, whose numbers in even a limited area may be almost
astronomical. The shells of each animal are bound to the rock by a
series of tough threads, each of shining silken appearance. The threads
are a kind of natural silk, spun by a gland in the foot. These anchor
lines extend out in all directions; if some are broken, the others hold
while the damaged lines are being replaced. But most of the threads are
directed forward and in the pounding of storm surf the mussel tends to
swing around and head into the seas, taking them on the narrow “prow”
and so minimizing their force.

Even the sea urchins can anchor themselves firmly in moderately strong
surf. Their slender tube feet, each equipped with a suction disc at its
tip, are thrust out in all directions. I have marveled at the green
urchins on a Maine shore, clinging to the exposed rock at low water of
spring tides, where the beautiful coralline algae spread a rose-colored
crust beneath the shining green of their bodies. At that place the
bottom slopes away steeply and when the waves at low tide break on the
crest of the slope, they drain back to the sea with a strong rush of
water. Yet as each wave recedes, the urchins remain on their accustomed
stations, undisturbed.

For the long-stalked kelps that sway in dusky forests just below the
level of the spring tides, survival in the surf zone is largely a matter
of chemistry. Their tissues contain large amounts of alginic acid and
its salts, which create a tensile strength and elasticity able to
withstand the pulling and pounding of the waves.

Still others—animal and plant—have been able to invade the surf zone
by reducing life to a thin creeping mat of cells. In such form many
sponges, ascidians, bryozoans, and algae can endure the force of waves.
Once removed from the shaping and conditioning effect of surf, however,
the same species may take on entirely different forms. The pale green
crumb-of-bread sponge lies flat and almost paper-thin on rocks facing
toward the sea; back in one of the deep rock pools its tissues build up
into thickened masses, sprinkled with the cone-and-crater structure that
is one of the marks of the species. Or the golden-star tunicate may
expose a simple sheet of jelly to the waves, though in quiet water it
hangs down in pendulous lobes flecked with the starry forms of the
creatures that comprise it.

As on the sands almost everything has learned to endure the surf by
burrowing down to escape it, so on the rocks some have found safety by
boring. Where ancient marl is exposed on the Carolina coast, it is
riddled by date mussels. Masses of peat contain the delicately
sculptured shells of mollusks called angel wings, seemingly fragile as
china, but nevertheless able to bore into clay or rock; concrete piers
are drilled by small boring clams; wooden timbers by other clams and
isopods. All of these creatures have exchanged their freedom for a
sanctuary from the waves, being imprisoned forever within the chambers
they have carved.

The vast current systems, which flow through the oceans like rivers, lie
for the most part offshore and one might suppose their influence in
intertidal matters to be slight. Yet the currents have far-reaching
effects, for they transport immense volumes of water over long
distances—water that holds its original temperature through thousands
of miles of its journey. In this way tropical warmth is carried
northward and arctic cold brought far down toward the equator. The
currents, probably more than any other single element, are the creators
of the marine climate.

The importance of climate lies in the fact that life, even as broadly
defined to include all living things of every sort, exists within a
relatively narrow range of temperature, roughly between 32° F. and 210°
F. The planet Earth is particularly favorable for life because it has a
fairly stable temperature. Especially in the sea, temperature changes
are moderate and gradual and many animals are so delicately adjusted to
the accustomed water climate that an abrupt or drastic change is fatal.
Animals living on the shore and exposed to air temperatures at low tide
are necessarily a little more hardy, but even these have their preferred
range of heat and cold beyond which they seldom stray.

Most tropical animals are more sensitive to change—especially toward
higher temperatures—than northern ones, and this is probably because
the water in which they live normally varies by only a few degrees
throughout the year. Some tropical sea urchins, keyhole limpets, and
brittle stars die when the shallow waters heat to about 99° F. The
arctic jellyfish Cyanea, on the other hand, is so hardy that it
continues to pulsate when half its bell is imprisoned in ice, and may
revive even after being solidly frozen for hours. The horseshoe crab is
an example of an animal that is very tolerant of temperature change. It
has a wide range as a species, and its northern forms can survive being
frozen into ice in New England, while its southern representatives
thrive in tropical waters of Florida and southward to Yucatán.

Shore animals for the most part endure the seasonal changes of temperate
coasts, but some find it necessary to escape the extreme cold of winter.
Ghost crabs and beach fleas are believed to dig very deep holes in the
sand and go into hibernation. Mole crabs that feed in the surf much of
the year retire to the bottom offshore in winter. Many of the hydroids,
so like flowering plants in appearance, shrink down to the very core of
their animal beings in winter, withdrawing all living tissues into the
basal stalk. Other shore animals, like annuals in the plant kingdom, die
at the end of summer. All of the white jellyfish, so common in coastal
waters during the summer, are dead when the last autumn gale has blown
itself out, but the next generation exists as little plant-like beings
attached to the rocks below the tide.

For the great majority of shore inhabitants that continue to live in the
accustomed places throughout the year, the most dangerous aspect of
winter is not cold but ice. In years when much shore ice is formed, the
rocks may be scraped clean of barnacles, mussels, and seaweeds simply by
the mechanical action of ice grinding in the surf. After this happens,
several growing seasons separated by moderate winters may be needed to
restore the full community of living creatures.

Because most sea animals have definite preferences as to aquatic
climate, it is possible to divide the coastal waters of eastern North
America into zones of life. While variation in the temperature of the
water within these zones is in part a matter of the advance from
southern to northern latitudes, it is also strongly influenced by the
pattern of the ocean currents—the sweep of warm tropical water carried
northward in the Gulf Stream, and the chill Labrador Current creeping
down from the north on the landward border of the Stream, with complex
intermixing of warm and cold water between the boundaries of the
currents.

From the point where it pours through the Florida straits up as far as
Cape Hatteras, the Stream follows the outer edge of the continental
shelf, which varies greatly in width. At Jupiter Inlet on the east coast
of Florida this shelf is so narrow that one can stand on shore and look
out across emerald-green shallows to the place where the water suddenly
takes on the intense blue of the Stream. At about this point there seems
to exist a temperature barrier, separating the tropical fauna of
southern Florida and the Keys from the warm-temperate fauna of the area
lying between Cape Canaveral and Cape Hatteras. Again at Hatteras the
shelf becomes narrow, the Stream swings closer inshore, and the
northward-moving water filters through a confused pattern of shoals and
submerged sandy hills and valleys. Here again is a boundary between life
zones, though it is a shifting and far from absolute one. During the
winter, temperatures at Hatteras probably forbid the northward passage
of migratory warm-water forms, but in summer the temperature barriers
break down, the invisible gates open, and these same species may range
far toward Cape Cod.

From Hatteras north the shelf broadens, the Stream moves far offshore,
and there is a strong infiltration and mixing of colder water from the
north, so that the progressive chilling is speeded. The difference in
temperature between Hatteras and Cape Cod is as great as one would find
on the opposite side of the Atlantic between the Canary Islands and
southern Norway—a distance five times as long. For migratory sea fauna
this is an intermediate zone, which cold-water forms enter in winter,
and warm-water species in summer. Even the resident fauna has a mixed,
indeterminate character, for this area seems to receive some of the more
temperature-tolerant forms from both north and south, but to have few
species that belong to it exclusively.

Cape Cod has long been recognized in zoology as marking the boundary of
the range for thousands of creatures. Thrust far into the sea, it
interferes with the passage of the warmer waters from the south and
holds the cold waters of the north within the long curve of its shore.
It is also a point of transition to a different kind of coast. The long
sand strands of the south are replaced by rocks, which come more and
more to dominate the coastal scene. They form the sea bottom as well as
its shores; the same rugged contours that appear in the land forms of
this region lie drowned and hidden from view offshore. Here zones of
deep water, with accompanying low temperatures, lie generally closer to
the shore than they do farther south, with interesting local effects on
the populations of shore animals. Despite the deep inshore waters, the
numerous islands and the jaggedly indented coast create a large
intertidal area and so provide for a rich shore fauna. This is the
cold-temperate region, inhabited by many species unable to tolerate the
warm water south of the Cape. Partly because of the low temperatures and
partly because of the rocky nature of the shore, heavy growths of
seaweeds cover the ebb tide rocks with a blanket of various hues, herds
of periwinkles graze, and the shore is here whitened by millions of
barnacles or there darkened by millions of mussels.

Beyond, in the waters bathing Labrador, southern Greenland, and parts of
Newfoundland, the temperature of the sea and the nature of its flora and
fauna are subarctic. Still farther to the north is the arctic province,
with limits not yet precisely defined.

Although these basic zones are still convenient and well-founded
divisions of the American coast, it became clear by about the third
decade of the twentieth century that Cape Cod was not the absolute
barrier it had once been for warm-water species attempting to round it
from the south. Curious changes have been taking place, with many
animals invading this cold-temperate zone from the south and pushing up
through Maine and even into Canada. This new distribution is, of course,
related to the widespread change of climate that seems to have set in
about the beginning of the century and is now well recognized—a general
warming-up noticed first in arctic regions, then in subarctic, and now
in the temperate areas of northern states. With warmer ocean waters
north of Cape Cod, not only the adults but the critically important
young stages of various southern animals have been able to survive.

One of the most impressive examples of northward movement is provided by
the green crab, once unknown north of the Cape, now familiar to every
clam fisherman in Maine because of its habit of preying on the young
stages of the clam. Around the turn of the century, zoological manuals
gave its range as New Jersey to Cape Cod. In 1905 it was reported near
Portland, and by 1930 specimens had been collected in Hancock County,
about midway along the Maine coast. During the following decade it moved
along to Winter Harbor, and in 1951 was found at Lubec. Then it spread
up along the shores of Passamaquoddy Bay and crossed to Nova Scotia.

With higher water temperatures the sea herring is becoming scarce in
Maine. The warmer waters may not be the only cause, but they are
undoubtedly responsible in part. As the sea herring decline, other kinds
of fish are coming in from the south. The menhaden is a larger member of
the herring family, used in enormous quantities for manufacturing
fertilizer, oils, and other industrial products. In the 1880’s there was
a fishery for menhaden in Maine, then they disappeared and for many
years were confined almost entirely to areas south of New Jersey. About
1950, however, they began to return to Maine waters, followed by
Virginia boats and fishermen. Another fish of the same tribe, called the
round herring, is also ranging farther north. In the 1920’s Professor
Henry Bigelow of Harvard University reported it as occurring from the
Gulf of Mexico to Cape Cod, and pointed out that it was rare anywhere on
the Cape. (Two caught at Provincetown were preserved in the Museum of
Comparative Zoölogy at Harvard.) In the 1950’s, however, immense schools
of this fish appeared in Maine waters, and the fishing industry began
experiments with canning it.

Many other scattered reports follow the same trend. The mantis shrimp,
formerly barred by the Cape, has now rounded it and spread into the
southern part of the Gulf of Maine. Here and there the soft-shell clam
shows signs of being adversely affected by warm summer temperatures and
the hard-shell species is replacing it in New York waters. Whiting, once
only summer fish north of the Cape, now are caught there throughout the
year, and other fish once thought distinctively southern are able to
spawn along the coast of New York, where their delicate juvenile stages
formerly were killed by the cold winters.

Despite the present exceptions, the Cape Cod—Newfoundland coast is
typically a zone of cool waters inhabited by a boreal flora and fauna.
It displays strong and fascinating affinities with distant places of the
northern world, linked by the unifying force of the sea with arctic
waters and with the coasts of the British Isles and Scandinavia. So many
of its species are duplicated in the eastern Atlantic that a handbook
for the British Isles serves reasonably well for New England, covering
probably 80 per cent of the seaweeds and 60 per cent of the marine
animals. On the other hand, the American boreal zone has stronger ties
with the arctic than does the British coast. One of the large Laminarian
seaweeds, the arctic kelp, comes down to the Maine coast but is absent
in the eastern Atlantic. An arctic sea anemone occurs in the western
North Atlantic abundantly down to Nova Scotia and less numerously in
Maine, but on the other side misses Great Britain and is confined to
colder waters farther north. The occurrence of many species such as the
green sea urchin, the blood-red starfish, the cod, and the herring are
examples of a distribution that is circumboreal, extending right around
the top of the earth and brought about through the agency of cold
currents from melting glaciers and drifting pack ice that carry
representatives of the northern faunas down into the North Pacific and
North Atlantic.

The existence of so strong a common element between the faunas and
floras of the two coasts of the North Atlantic suggests that the means
of crossing must be relatively easy. The Gulf Stream carries many
migrants away from American shores. The distance to the opposite side is
great, however, and the situation is complicated by the short larval
life of most species and the fact that shallow waters must be within
reach when the time comes for assuming the life of the adult. In this
northern part of the Atlantic intermediate way-stations are provided by
submerged ridges, shallows, and islands, and the crossing may be broken
into easy stages. In some earlier geologic times these shallows were
even more extensive, so over long periods both active and involuntary
migration across the Atlantic have been feasible.

In lower latitudes the deep basin of the Atlantic must be crossed, where
few islands or shallows exist. Even here some transfer of larvae and
adults takes place. The Bermuda Islands, after being raised above the
sea by volcanic action, received their whole fauna as immigrants from
the West Indies via the Gulf Stream. And on a smaller scale the long
transatlantic crossings have been accomplished. Considering the
difficulties, an impressive number of West Indian species are identical
with, or closely related to African species, apparently having crossed
in the Equatorial Current. They include species of starfish, shrimp,
crayfish, and mollusks. Where such a long crossing has been made it is
logical to assume that the migrants were adults, traveling on floating
timber or drifting seaweed. In modern times, several African mollusks
and starfish have been reported as arriving at the Island of St. Helena
by these means.

The records of paleontology provide evidence of the changing shapes of
continents and the changing flow of the ocean currents, for these
earlier earth patterns account for the otherwise mysterious present
distribution of many plants and animals. Once, for example, the West
Indian region of the Atlantic was in direct communication, via sea
currents, with the distant waters of the Pacific and Indian Oceans. Then
a land bridge built up between the Americas, the Equatorial Current
turned back on itself to the east, and a barrier to the dispersal of sea
creatures was erected. But in species living today we find indications
of how it was in the past. Once I discovered a curious little mollusk
living in a meadow of turtle grass on the floor of a quiet bay among
Florida’s Ten Thousand Islands. It was the same bright green as the
grass, and its little body was much too large for its thin shell, out of
which it bulged. It was one of the scaphanders, and its nearest living
relatives are inhabitants of the Indian Ocean. And on the beaches of the
Carolinas I have found rocklike masses of calcareous tubes, secreted by
colonies of a dark-bodied little worm. It is almost unknown in the
Atlantic; again its relatives are Pacific and Indian Ocean forms.

And so transport and wide dispersal are a continuing, universal
process—an expression of the need of life to reach out and occupy all
habitable parts of the earth. In any age the pattern is set by the shape
of the continents and the flow of the currents; but it is never final,
never completed.

On a shore where tidal action is strong and the range of the tide is
great, one is aware of the ebb and flow of water with a daily, hourly
awareness. Each recurrent high tide is a dramatic enactment of the
advance of the sea against the continents, pressing up to the very
threshold of the land, while the ebbs expose to view a strange and
unfamiliar world. Perhaps it is a broad mud flat where curious holes,
mounds, or tracks give evidence of a hidden life alien to the land; or
perhaps it is a meadow of rockweeds lying prostrate and sodden now that
the sea has left them, spreading a protective cloak over all the animal
life beneath them. Even more directly the tides address the sense of
hearing, speaking a language of their own distinct from the voice of the
surf. The sound of a rising tide is heard most clearly on shores removed
from the swell of the open ocean. In the stillness of night the strong
waveless surge of a rising tide creates a confused tumult of water
sounds—swashings and swirlings and a continuous slapping against the
rocky rim of the land. Sometimes there are undertones of murmurings and
whisperings; then suddenly all lesser sounds are obliterated by a
torrential inpouring of water.

On such a shore the tides shape the nature and behavior of life. Their
rise and fall give every creature that lives between the high- and
low-water lines a twice-daily experience of land life. For those that
live near the low tide line the exposure to sun and air is brief; for
those higher on the shore the interval in an alien environment is more
prolonged and demands greater powers of endurance. But in all the
intertidal area the pulse of life is adjusted to the rhythm of the
tides. In a world that belongs alternately to sea and land, marine
animals, breathing oxygen dissolved in sea water, must find ways of
keeping moist; the few air breathers who have crossed the high tide line
from the land must protect themselves from drowning in the flood tide by
bringing with them their own supply of oxygen. When the tide is low
there is little or no food for most intertidal animals, and indeed the
essential processes of life usually have to be carried on while water
covers the shore. The tidal rhythm is therefore reflected in a
biological rhythm of alternating activity and quiescence.

On a rising tide, animals that live deep in sand come to the surface, or
thrust up the long breathing tubes or siphons, or begin to pump water
through their burrows. Animals fixed to rocks open their shells or reach
out tentacles to feed. Predators and grazers move about actively. When
the water ebbs away the sand dwellers withdraw into the deep wet layers;
the rock fauna brings into use all its varied means for avoiding
desiccation. Worms that build calcareous tubes draw back into them,
sealing the entrance with a modified gill filament that fits like a cork
in a bottle. Barnacles close their shells, holding the moisture around
their gills. Snails draw back into their shells, closing the doorlike
operculum to shut out the air and keep some of the sea’s wetness within.
Scuds and beach fleas hide under rocks or weeds, waiting for the
incoming tide to release them.

All through the lunar month, as the moon waxes and wanes, so the
moon-drawn tides increase or decline in strength and the lines of high
and low water shift from day to day. After the full moon, and again
after the new moon, the forces acting on the sea to produce the tide are
stronger than at any other time during the month. This is because the
sun and moon then are directly in line with the earth and their
attractive forces are added together. For complex astronomical reasons,
the greatest tidal effect is exerted over a period of several days
immediately after the full and the new moon, rather than at a time
precisely coinciding with these lunar phases. During these periods the
flood tides rise higher and the ebb tides fall lower than at any other
time. These are called the “spring tides” from the Saxon “sprungen.” The
word refers not to a season, but to the brimming fullness of the water
causing it to “spring” in the sense of a strong, active movement. No one
who has watched a new-moon tide pressing against a rocky cliff will
doubt the appropriateness of the term. In its quarter phases, the moon
exerts its attraction at right angles to the pull of the sun so the two
forces interfere with each other and the tidal movements are slack. Then
the water neither rises as high nor falls as low as on the spring tides.
These sluggish tides are called the “neaps”—a word that goes back to
old Scandinavian roots meaning “barely touching” or “hardly enough.”

On the Atlantic coast of North America the tides move in the so-called
semi-diurnal rhythm, with two high and two low waters in each tidal day
of about 24 hours and 50 minutes. Each low tide follows the previous low
by about 12 hours and 25 minutes, although slight local variations are
possible. A like interval, of course, separates the high tides.

The range of tide shows enormous differences over the earth as a whole
and even on the Atlantic coast of the United States there are important
variations. There is a rise and fall of only a foot or two around the
Florida Keys. On the long Atlantic coast of Florida the spring tides
have a range of 3 to 4 feet, but a little to the north, among the Sea
Islands of Georgia, these tides have an 8-foot rise. Then in the
Carolinas and northward to New England they move less strongly, with
spring tides of 6 feet at Charleston, South Carolina, 3 feet at
Beaufort, North Carolina, and 5 feet at Cape May, New Jersey. Nantucket
Island has little tide, but on the shores of Cape Cod Bay, less than 30
miles away, the spring tide range is 10 to 11 feet. Most of the rocky
coast of New England falls within the zone of the great tides of the Bay
of Fundy. From Cape Cod to Passamaquoddy Bay the amplitude of their
range varies but is always considerable: 10 feet at Provincetown, 12 at
Bar Harbor, 20 at Eastport, 22 at Calais. The conjunction of strong
tides and a rocky shore, where much of the life is exposed, creates in
this area a beautiful demonstration of the power of the tides over
living things.

As day after day these great tides ebb and flow over the rocky rim of
New England, their progress across the shore is visibly marked in
stripes of color running parallel to the sea’s edge. These bands, or
zones, are composed of living things and reflect the stages of the tide,
for the length of time that a particular level of shore is uncovered
determines, in large measure, what can live there. The hardiest species
live in the upper zones. Some of the earth’s most ancient plants—the
blue-green algae—though originating eons ago in the sea, have emerged
from it to form dark tracings on the rocks above the high tide line, a
black zone visible on rocky shores in all parts of the world. Below the
black zone, snails that are evolving toward a land existence browse on
the film of vegetation or hide in seams and crevices in the rocks. But
the most conspicuous zone begins at the upper line of the tides. On an
open shore with moderately heavy surf, the rocks are whitened by the
crowded millions of the barnacles just below the high tide line. Here
and there the white is interrupted by mussels growing in patches of
darkest blue. Below them the seaweeds come in—the brown fields of the
rockweeds. Toward the low tide line the Irish moss spreads its low
cushioning growth—a wide band of rich color that is not fully exposed
by the sluggish movements of some of the neap tides, but appears on all
of the greater tides. Sometimes the reddish-brown of the moss is
splashed with the bright green tangles of another seaweed, a hairlike
growth of wiry texture. The lowest of the spring tides reveal still
another zone during the last hour of their fall—that sub-tide world
where all the rock is painted a deep rose hue by the lime-secreting
seaweeds that encrust it, and where the gleaming brown ribbons of the
large kelps lie exposed on the rocks.

With only minor variations, this pattern of life exists in all parts of
the world. The differences from place to place are related usually to
the force of the surf, and one zone may be largely suppressed and
another enormously developed. The barnacle zone, for example, spreads
its white sheets over all the upper shore where waves are heavy, and the
rockweed zone is greatly reduced. With protection from surf, the
rockweeds not only occupy the middle shore in profusion but invade the
upper rocks and make conditions difficult for the barnacles.

Perhaps in a sense the true intertidal zone is that band between high
and low water of the neap tides, an area that is completely covered and
uncovered during each tidal cycle, or twice during every day. Its
inhabitants are the typical shore animals and plants, requiring some
daily contact with the sea but able to endure limited exposure to land
conditions.

Above high water of neaps is a band that seems more of earth than of
sea. It is inhabited chiefly by pioneering species; already they have
gone far along the road toward land life and can endure separation from
the sea for many hours or days. One of the barnacles has colonized these
higher high tide rocks, where the sea comes only a few days and nights
out of the month, on the spring tides. When the sea returns it brings
food and oxygen, and in season carries away the young into the nursery
of the surface waters; during these brief periods the barnacle is able
to carry on all the processes necessary for life. But it is left again
in an alien land world when the last of these highest tides of the
fortnight ebbs away; then its only defense is the firm closing of the
plates of its shell to hold some of the moisture of the sea about its
body. In its life brief and intense activity alternates with long
periods of a quiescent state resembling hibernation. Like the plants of
the Arctic, which must crowd the making and storing of food, the putting
forth of flowers, and the forming of seeds into a few brief weeks of
summer, this barnacle has drastically adjusted its way of life so that
it may survive in a region of harsh conditions.

Some few sea animals have pushed on even above high water of the spring
tides into the splash zone, where the only salty moisture comes from the
spray of breaking waves. Among such pioneers are snails of the
periwinkle tribe. One of the West Indian species can endure months of
separation from the sea. Another, the European rock periwinkle, waits
for the waves of the spring tides to cast its eggs into the sea, in
almost all activities except the vital one of reproduction being
independent of the water.

Below the low water of neaps are the areas exposed only as the rhythmic
swing of the tides falls lower and lower, approaching the level of the
springs. Of all the intertidal zone this region is linked most closely
with the sea. Many of its inhabitants are offshore forms, able to live
here only because of the briefness and infrequency of exposure to the
air.

The relation between the tides and the zones of life is clear, but in
many less obvious ways animals have adjusted their activities to the
tidal rhythm. Some seem to be a mechanical matter of utilizing the
movement of water. The larval oyster, for example, uses the flow of the
tides to carry it into areas favorable for its attachment. Adult oysters
live in bays or sounds or river estuaries rather than in water of full
oceanic salinity, and so it is to the advantage of the race for the
dispersal of the young stages to take place in a direction away from the
open sea. When first hatched the larvae drift passively, the tidal
currents carrying them now toward the sea, now toward the headwaters of
estuaries or bays. In many estuaries the ebb tide runs longer than the
flood, having the added push and volume of stream discharge behind it,
and the resulting seaward drift over the whole two-week period of larval
life would carry the young oysters many miles to sea. A sharp change of
behavior sets in, however, as the larvae grow older. They now drop to
the bottom while the tide ebbs, avoiding the seaward drift of water, but
with the return of the flood they rise into the currents that are
pressing upstream, and so are carried into regions of lower salinity
that are favorable for their adult life.

Others adjust the rhythm of spawning to protect their young from the
danger of being carried into unsuitable waters. One of the tube-building
worms living in or near the tidal zone follows a pattern that avoids the
strong movements of the spring tides. It releases its larvae into the
sea every fortnight on the neap tides, when the water movements are
relatively sluggish; the young worms, which have a very brief swimming
stage, then have a good chance of remaining within the most favorable
zone of the shore.

There are other tidal effects, mysterious and intangible. Sometimes
spawning is synchronized with the tides in a way that suggests response
to change of pressure or to the difference between still and flowing
water. A primitive mollusk called the chiton spawns in Bermuda when the
low tide occurs early in the morning, with the return flow of water
setting in just after sunrise. As soon as the chitons are covered with
water they shed their spawn. One of the Japanese nereid worms spawns
only on the strongest tides of the year, near the new- and full-moon
tides of October and November, presumably stirred in sonic obscure way
by the amplitude of the water movements.

Many other animals, belonging to quite unrelated groups throughout the
whole range of sea life, spawn according to a definitely fixed rhythm
that may coincide with the full moon or the new moon or its quarters,
but whether the effect is produced by the altered pressure of the tides
or the changing light of the moon is by no means clear. For example,
there is a sea urchin in Tortugas that spawns on the night of the full
moon, and apparently only then. Whatever the stimulus may be, all the
individuals of the species respond to it, assuring the simultaneous
release of immense numbers of reproductive cells. On the coast of
England one of the hydroids, an animal of plant-like appearance that
produces tiny medusae or jellyfish, releases these medusae during the
moon’s third quarter. At Woods Hole on the Massachusetts coast a
clamlike mollusk spawns heavily between the full and the new moon but
avoids the first quarter. And a nereid worm at Naples gathers in its
nuptial swarms during the quarters of the moon but never when the moon
is new or full; a related worm at Woods Hole shows no such correlation
although exposed to the same moon and to stronger tides.

In none of these examples can we be sure whether the animal is
responding to the tides or, as the tides themselves do, to the influence
of the moon. With plants, however, the situation is different, and here
and there we find scientific confirmation of the ancient and world-wide
belief in the effect of moonlight on vegetation. Various bits of
evidence suggest that the rapid multiplication of diatoms and other
members of the plant plankton is related to the phases of the moon.
Certain algae in river plankton reach the peak of their abundance at the
full moon. One of the brown seaweeds on the coast of North Carolina
releases its reproductive cells only on the full moon, and similar
behavior has been reported for other seaweeds in Japan and other parts
of the world. These responses are generally explained as the effect of
varying intensities of polarized light on protoplasm.

Other observations suggest some connection between plants and the
reproduction and growth of animals. Rapidly maturing herring collect
around the edge of concentrations of plant plankton, although the fully
adult herring may avoid them. Spawning adults, eggs, and young of
various other marine creatures are reported to occur more often in dense
phytoplankton than in sparse patches. In significant experiments, a
Japanese scientist discovered he could induce oysters to spawn with an
extract obtained from sea lettuce. The same seaweed produces a substance
that influences growth and multiplication of diatoms, and is itself
stimulated by water taken from the vicinity of a heavy growth of
rockweeds.

The whole subject of the presence in sea water of the so-called
“ectocrines” (external secretions or products of metabolism) has so
recently become one of the frontiers of science that actual information
is fragmentary and tantalizing. It appears, however, that we may be on
the verge of solving some of the riddles that have plagued men’s minds
for centuries. Though the subject lies in the misty borderlands of
advancing knowledge, almost everything that in the past has been taken
for granted, as well as problems considered insoluble, bear renewed
thought in the light of the discovery of these substances.

In the sea there are mysterious comings and goings, both in space and
time: the movements of migratory species, the strange phenomenon of
succession by which, in one and the same area, one species appears in
profusion, flourishes for a time, and then dies out, only to have its
place taken by another and then another, like actors in a pageant
passing before our eyes. And there are other mysteries. The phenomenon
of “red tides” has been known from early days, recurring again and again
down to the present time—a phenomenon in which the sea becomes
discolored because of the extraordinary multiplication of some minute
form, often a dinoflagellate, and in which there are disastrous side
effects in the shape of mass mortalities among fish and some of the
invertebrates. Then there is the problem of curious and seemingly
erratic movements of fish, into or away from certain areas, often with
sharp economic consequences. When the so-called “Atlantic water” floods
the south coast of England, herring become abundant within the range of
the Plymouth fisheries, certain characteristic plankton animals occur in
profusion, and certain species of invertebrates flourish in the
intertidal zone. When, however, this water mass is replaced by Channel
water, the cast of characters undergoes many changes.

In the discovery of the biological role played by the sea water and all
it contains, we may be about to reach an understanding of these old
mysteries. For it is now clear that in the sea nothing lives to itself.
The very water is altered, in its chemical nature and in its capacity
for influencing life processes, by the fact that certain forms have
lived within it and have passed on to it new substances capable of
inducing far-reaching effects. So the present is linked with past and
future, and each living thing with all that surrounds it.




                            The Rocky Shores


WHEN THE TIDE is high on a rocky shore, when its brimming fullness
creeps up almost to the bayberry and the junipers where they come down
from the land, one might easily suppose that nothing at all lived in or
on or under these waters of the sea’s edge. For nothing is visible.
Nothing except here and there a little group of herring gulls, for at
high tide the gulls rest on ledges of rock, dry above the surf and the
spray, and they tuck their yellow bills under their feathers and doze
away the hours of the rising water. Then all the creatures of the tidal
rocks are hidden from view, but the gulls know what is there, and they
know that in time the water will fall away again and give them entrance
to the strip between the tide lines.

When the tide is rising the shore is a place of unrest, with the surge
leaping high over jutting rocks and running in lacy cascades of foam
over the landward side of massive boulders. But on the ebb it is more
peaceful, for then the waves do not have behind them the push of the
inward pressing tides. There is no particular drama about the turn of
the tide, but presently a zone of wetness shows on the gray rock slopes,
and offshore the incoming swells begin to swirl and break over hidden
ledges. Soon the rocks that the high tide had concealed rise into view
and glisten with the wetness left on them by the receding water.

Small, dingy snails move about over rocks that are slippery with the
growth of infinitesimal green plants; the snails scraping, scraping,
scraping to find food before the surf returns.

Like drifts of old snow no longer white, the barnacles come into view;
they blanket rocks and old spars wedged into rock crevices, and their
sharp cones are sprinkled over empty mussel shells and lobster-pot buoys
and the hard stipes of deep-water seaweeds, all mingled in the flotsam
of the tide.

Meadows of brown rockweeds appear on the gently sloping rocks of the
shore as the tide imperceptibly ebbs. Smaller patches of green weed,
stringy as mermaids’ hair, begin to turn white and crinkly where the sun
has dried them.

Now the gulls, that lately rested on the higher ledges, pace with grave
intentness along the walls of rock, and they probe under the hanging
curtains of weed to find crabs and sea urchins.

In the low places little pools and gutters are left where the water
trickles and gurgles and cascades in miniature waterfalls, and many of
the dark caverns between and under the rocks are floored with still
mirrors holding the reflections of delicate creatures that shun the
light and avoid the shock of waves—the cream-colored flowers of the
small anemones and the pink fingers of soft coral, pendent from the
rocky ceiling.

In the calm world of the deeper rock pools, now undisturbed by the
tumult of incoming waves, crabs sidle along the walls, their claws
busily touching, feeling, exploring for bits of food. The pools are
gardens of color composed of the delicate green and ocher-yellow of
encrusting sponge, the pale pink of hydroids that stand like clusters of
fragile spring flowers, the bronze and electric-blue gleams of the Irish
moss, the old-rose beauty of the coralline algae.

And over it all there is the smell of low tide, compounded of the faint,
pervasive smell of worms and snails and jellyfish and crabs—the sulphur
smell of sponge, the iodine smell of rockweed, and the salt smell of the
rime that glitters on the sun-dried rocks.

One of my own favorite approaches to a rocky seacoast is by a rough path
through an evergreen forest that has its own peculiar enchantment. It is
usually an early morning tide that takes me along that forest path, so
that the light is still pale and fog drifts in from the sea beyond. It
is almost a ghost forest, for among the living spruce and balsam are
many dead trees—some still erect, some sagging earthward, some lying on
the floor of the forest. All the trees, the living and the dead, are
clothed with green and silver crusts of lichens. Tufts of the bearded
lichen or old man’s beard hang from the branches like bits of sea mist
tangled there. Green woodland mosses and a yielding carpet of reindeer
moss cover the ground. In the quiet of that place even the voice of the
surf is reduced to a whispered echo and the sounds of the forest are but
the ghosts of sound—the faint sighing of evergreen needles in the
moving air; the creaks and heavier groans of half-fallen trees resting
against their neighbors and rubbing bark against bark; the light
rattling fall of a dead branch broken under the feet of a squirrel and
sent bouncing and ricocheting earthward.

But finally the path emerges from the dimness of the deeper forest and
comes to a place where the sound of surf rises above the forest
sounds—the hollow boom of the sea, rhythmic and insistent, striking
against the rocks, falling away, rising again.

Up and down the coast the line of the forest is drawn sharp and clean on
the edge of a seascape of surf and sky and rocks. The softness of sea
fog blurs the contours of the rocks; gray water and gray mists merge
offshore in a dim and vaporous world that might be a world of creation,
stirring with new life.

The sense of newness is more than illusion born of the early morning
light and the fog, for this is in very fact a young coast. It was only
yesterday in the life of the earth that the sea came in as the coast
subsided, filling the valleys and rising about the slopes of the hills,
creating these rugged shores where rocks rise out of the sea and
evergreen forests come down to the coastal rocks. Once this shore was
like the ancient land to the south, where the nature of the coast has
changed little during the millions of years since the sea and the wind
and the rain created its sands and shaped them into dune and beach and
offshore bar and shoal. The northern coast, too, had its flat coastal
plain bordered by wide beaches of sand. Behind these lay a landscape of
rocky hills alternating with valleys that had been worn by streams and
deepened and sculptured by glaciers. The hills were formed of gneiss and
other crystalline rocks resistant to erosion; the lowlands had been
created in beds of weaker rocks like sandstones, shale, and marl.

Then the scene changed. From a point somewhere in the vicinity of Long
Island the flexible crust of the earth tilted downward under the burden
of a vast glacier. The regions we know as eastern Maine and Nova Scotia
were pressed down into the earth, some areas being carried as much as
1200 feet beneath the sea. All of the northern coastal plain was
drowned. Some of its more elevated parts are now offshore shoals, the
fishing banks off the New England and Canadian coasts—Georges, Browns,
Quereau, the Grand Bank. None of it remains above the sea except here
and there a high and isolated hill, like the present island of Monhegan,
which in ancient times must have stood above the coastal plain as a bold
monadnock.

Where the mountainous ridges and the valleys lay at an angle to the
coast, the sea ran far up between the hills and occupied the valleys.
This was the origin of the deeply indented and exceedingly irregular
coast that is characteristic of much of Maine. The long narrow estuaries
of the Kennebec, the Sheepscot, the Damariscotta and many other rivers
run inland a score of miles. These salt-water rivers, now arms of the
sea, are the drowned valleys in which grass and trees grew in a geologic
yesterday. The rocky, forested ridges between them probably looked much
as they do today. Offshore, chains of islands jut out obliquely into the
sea, one beyond another—half-submerged ridges of the former land mass.

But where the shore line is parallel to the massive ridges of rock the
coast line is smoother, with few indentations. The rains of earlier
centuries cut only short valleys into the flanks of the granite hills,
and so when the sea rose there were created only a few short, broad bays
instead of long winding ones. Such a coast occurs typically in southern
Nova Scotia, and also may be seen in the Cape Ann region of
Massachusetts, where the belts of resistant rock curve eastward along
the coast. On such a coast, islands, where they occur, lie parallel to
the shore line instead of putting boldly out to sea.

As geologic events are reckoned, all this happened rather rapidly and
suddenly, with no time for gradual adjustment of the landscape; also it
happened quite recently, the present relation of land and sea being
achieved perhaps no more than ten thousand years ago. In the chronology
of Earth, a few thousand years are as nothing, and in so brief a time
the waves have prevailed little against the hard rocks that the great
ice sheet scraped clean of loose rock and ancient soil, and so have
scarcely marked out the deep notches that in time they will cut in the
cliffs.

For the most part, the ruggedness of this coast is the ruggedness of the
hills themselves. There are none of the wave-cut stacks and arches that
distinguish older coasts or coasts of softer rock. In a few, exceptional
places the work of the waves may be seen. The south shore of Mount
Desert Island is exposed to heavy pounding by surf; there the waves have
cut out Anemone Cave and are working at Thunder Hole to batter through
the roof of the small cave into which the surf roars at high tide.

In places the sea washes the foot of a steep cliff produced by the
shearing effect of earth pressure along fault lines. Cliffs on Mount
Desert—Schooner Head, Great Head, and Otter—tower a hundred feet or
more above the sea. Such imposing structures might be taken for wave-cut
cliffs if one did not know the geologic history of the region.

On the coasts of Cape Breton Island and New Brunswick the situation is
very different and examples of advanced marine erosion occur on every
hand. Here the sea is in contact with weak rock lowlands formed in the
Carboniferous period. These shores have little resistance to the erosive
power of the waves, and the soft sandstone and conglomerate rocks are
being cut back at an annual rate averaging five or six inches, or in
some places several feet. Marine stacks, caves, chimneys, and archways
are common features of these shores.

Here and there on the predominantly rocky coast of northern New England
there are small beaches of sand, pebbles, or cobblestones. These have a
varied origin. Some came from glacial debris that covered the rocky
surface when the land tilted and the sea came in. Boulders and pebbles
often are carried in from deeper water offshore by seaweeds that have
gripped them firmly with their “holdfasts.” Storm waves then dislodge
weed and stone and cast them on the shore. Even without the aid of
weeds, waves carry in a considerable volume of sand, gravel, shell
fragments, and even boulders. These occasional sandy or pebbly beaches
are almost always in protected, incurving shores or dead-end coves,
where the waves can deposit debris but from which they cannot easily
remove it.

When, on those coastal rocks between the serrate line of spruces and the
surf, the morning mists conceal the lighthouses and fishing boats and
all other reminders of man, they also blur the sense of time and one
might easily imagine that the sea came in only yesterday to create this
particular line of coast. Yet the creatures that inhabit the intertidal
rocks have had time to establish themselves here, replacing the fauna of
the beaches of sand and mud that probably bordered the older coast. Out
of the same sea that rose over the northern coast of New England,
drowning the coastal plain and coming to rest against the hard uplands,
the larvae of the rock dwellers came—the blindly searching larvae that
drift in the ocean currents ready to colonize whatever suitable land may
lie in their path or to die, if no such landfall is their lot.

Although no one recorded the first colonist or traced the succession of
living forms, we may make a fairly confident guess as to the pioneers of
the occupation of these rocks, and the forms that followed them. The
invading sea must have brought the larvae and young of many kinds of
shore animals, but only those able to find food could survive on the new
shore. And in the beginning the only available food was the plankton
that came in renewed clouds with every tide that washed the coastal
rocks. The first permanent inhabitants must have been such
plankton-strainers as the barnacles and mussels, who require little but
a firm place to which they may attach themselves. Around and among the
white cones of the barnacles and the dark shells of the mussels it is
probable that the spores of algae settled, so that a living green film
began to spread over the upper rocks. Then the grazers could come—the
little herds of snails that laboriously scrape the rocks with their
sharp tongues, licking off the nearly invisible covering of tiny plant
cells. Only after the establishment of the plankton-strainers and the
grazers could the carnivores settle and survive. The predatory dog
whelks, the starfish, and many of the crabs and worms must, then, have
been comparative latecomers to this rocky shore. But all of them are
there now, living out their lives in the horizontal zones created by the
tides, or in the little pockets or communities of life established by
the need to take shelter from surf, or to find food, or to hide from
enemies.

The pattern of life spread before me when I emerge from that forest path
is one characteristic of exposed shores. From the edge of the spruce
forests down to the dark groves of the kelps, the life of the land
grades into the life of the sea, perhaps with less abruptness than one
would expect, for by various little interlacing ties the ancient unity
of the two is made clear.

Lichens live in the forest above the sea, in the silent intensity of
their toil crumbling away the rocks as lichens have done for millions of
years. Some leave the forest and advance over the bare rock toward the
tide line; a few go even farther, enduring a periodic submersion by the
sea so that they may work their strange magic on the rocks of the
intertidal zone. In the dampness of foggy mornings the rock tripe on the
seaward slopes is like sheets of thin, pliable green leather, but by
midday under a drying sun it has become blackened and brittle; then the
rocks look as though they were sloughing off a thin outer layer.
Thriving in the salt spray, the wall lichen spreads its orange stain on
the cliffs and even on the landward side of boulders that are visited by
the highest tides of each moon. Scales of other lichens, sage-green,
rolled and twisted into strange shapes, rise from the lower rocks; from
their under surfaces black, hairy processes work down among the minute
particles of rock substance, giving off an acid secretion to dissolve
the rock. As the hairs absorb moisture and swell, fine grains of the
rock are dislodged and so the work of creating soil from the rock is
advanced.

Below the forest’s edge the rock is white or gray or buff, according to
its mineral nature. It is dry and belongs to the land; except for a few
insects or other land creatures using it as pathways to the sea it is
barren. But just above the area that clearly belongs to the sea, it
shows a strange discoloration, being strongly marked with streaks or
patches or continuous bands of black. Nothing about this black zone
suggests life; one would call it a dark stain, or at most a felty
roughening of the rock surface. Yet it is actually a dense growth of
minute plants. The species that compose it sometimes include a very
small lichen, sometimes one or more of the green algae, but most
numerously the simplest and most ancient of all plants, the blue-green
algae. Some are enclosed in slimy sheaths that protect them from drying
and fit them to endure long exposure to sun and air. All are so minute
as to be invisible as individual plants. Their gelatinous sheaths and
the fact that the whole area receives the spray of breaking waves make
this entrance to the sea world slippery as the smoothest ice.

This black zone of the shore has a meaning above and beyond its drab and
lifeless aspect—a meaning obscure, elusive, and infinitely tantalizing.
Wherever rocks meet the sea, the microplants have written their dark
inscription, a message only partially legible although it seems in some
way to be concerned with the universality of tides and oceans. Though
other elements of the intertidal world come and go, this darkening stain
is omnipresent. The rockweeds, the barnacles, the snails, and the
mussels appear and disappear in the intertidal zone according to the
changing nature of their world, but the black inscriptions of the
microplants are always there. Seeing them here on this Maine coast, I
remember how they also blackened the coral rim of Key Largo, and
streaked the smooth platform of coquina at St. Augustine, and left their
tracings on the concrete jetties at Beaufort. It is the same all over
the world—from South Africa to Norway and from the Aleutians to
Australia. This is the sign of the meeting of land and sea.

Once below the dark film, I begin to look for the first of the sea
creatures pressing up to the threshold of the land. In seams and
crevices in the high rocks I find them—the smallest of the periwinkle
tribe, the rock or rough periwinkle. Some—the infant snails—are so
small that I need my hand lens to see them clearly, and among the
hundreds that crowd into these cracks and depressions I can find a
gradation of sizes up to the half-inch adults. If these were sea
creatures of ordinary habits, I would think the small snails were young
produced by some distant colony and drifted here as larvae after
spending a period at sea. But the rough periwinkle sends no young into
the sea; instead it is a viviparous species and the eggs, each encased
within a cocoon, are held within the mother while they develop. The
contents of the cocoon nourish the young snail until finally it breaks
through the egg capsule and then emerges from the mother’s body, a
completely shelled little creature about the size of a grain of finely
ground coffee. So small an animal might easily be washed out to sea;
hence, no doubt, the habit of hiding in crevices and in empty barnacle
shells, where often I have found them in numbers.

At the level where most of the rough periwinkles live, however, the sea
comes only every fortnight on the spring tides, and in the long
intervals the flying spray of breaking waves is their only contact with
the water. While the rocks are thoroughly wet with spray the periwinkles
can spend much time out on the rocks feeding, often working well up into
the black zone. The microplants that create the slippery film on the
rocks are their food; like all snails of their group, the periwinkles
are vegetarians. They feed by scraping the rocks with a peculiar organ
set with many rows of sharp, calcareous teeth. This organ, the radula,
is a continuous belt or ribbon that lies on the floor of the pharynx. If
unwound, it would be many times the length of the animal, but it is
tightly coiled like a watch spring. The radula itself consists of
chitin, the substance of insects’ wings and lobsters’ shells. The teeth
that stud it are arranged in several hundred rows (in another species,
the common periwinkle, the teeth total about 3500). A certain amount of
wear is involved in scraping the rocks, and when the teeth in current
use are worn down, an endless supply of new ones can be rolled up from
behind.

And there is wear, also, on the rocks. Over the decades and the
centuries, a large population of periwinkles scraping the rocks for food
has a pronounced erosive effect, cutting away rock surfaces, grain by
grain, deepening the tide pools. In a tide pool observed for sixteen
years by a California biologist, periwinkles lowered the floor about
three-eighths of an inch. Rain, frost, and floods—the earth’s major
forces of erosion—operate on approximately such a scale.

The periwinkles grazing on the intertidal rocks, waiting for the return
of the tide, are poised also in time, waiting for the moment when they
can complete their present phase of evolution and move forward onto the
land. All snails that are now terrestrial came of marine ancestry, their
forebears having at some time made the transitional crossing of the
shore. The periwinkles now are in mid-passage. In the structure and
habits of the three species found on the New England coast, one can see
clearly the evolutionary stages by which a marine creature is
transformed into a land dweller. The smooth periwinkle, still bound to
the sea, can endure only brief exposure. At low tide it remains in wet
seaweeds. The common periwinkle often lives where it is submerged only
briefly at high tide. It still sheds eggs into the sea and so is not
ready for land life. The rough periwinkle, however, has cut most of the
ties that confine it to the sea; it is now almost a land animal. By
becoming viviparous it has progressed beyond dependence on the sea for
reproduction. It is able to thrive at the level of the high water of the
spring tides because, unlike the related periwinkles of lower tidal
levels, it possesses a gill cavity that is well supplied with blood
vessels and functions almost as a lung to breathe oxygen from the air.
Constant submersion is, in fact, fatal to it and at the present stage of
its evolution it can endure up to thirty-one days of exposure to dry
air.

The rough periwinkle has been found by a French experimenter to have the
rhythm of the tides deeply impressed upon its behavior patterns, so that
it “remembers” even when no longer exposed to the alternating rise and
fall of the water. It is most active during the fortnightly visits of
the spring tides to its rocks, but in the waterless intervals it becomes
progressively more sluggish and its tissues undergo a certain
desiccation. With the return of the spring tides the cycle is reversed.
When taken into a laboratory the snails for many months reflect in their
behavior the advance and retreat of the sea over their native shores.

On this exposed New England coast the most conspicuous animals of the
high tide zone are the rock or acorn barnacles, which are able to live
in all but the most tumultuous surf. The rockweeds here are so stunted
by wave action that they offer no competition, and so the barnacles have
taken over the upper shore, except for such space as the mussels have
been able to hold.

At low tide the barnacle-covered rocks seem a mineral landscape carved
and sculptured into millions of little sharply pointed cones. There is
no movement, no sign or suggestion of life. The stony shells, like those
of mollusks, are calcareous and are secreted by the invisible animals
within. Each cone-shaped shell consists of six neatly fitted plates
forming an encircling ring. A covering door of four plates closes to
protect the barnacle from drying when the tide has ebbed, or swings open
to allow it to feed. The first ripples of incoming tide bring the
petrified fields to life. Then, if one stands ankle-deep in water and
observes closely, one sees tiny shadows flickering everywhere over the
submerged rocks. Over each individual cone, a feathered plume is
regularly thrust out and drawn back within the slightly opened portals
of the central door—the rhythmic motions by which the barnacle sweeps
in diatoms and other microscopic life of the returning sea.

The creature inside each shell is something like a small pinkish shrimp
that lies head downward, firmly cemented to the base of this chamber it
cannot leave. Only the appendages are ever exposed—six pairs of
branched, slender wands, jointed and set with bristles. Acting together,
they form a net of great efficiency.

The barnacle belongs to the group of arthropods known as the Crustacea,
a varied horde including the lobsters, crabs, sand hoppers, brine
shrimps, and water fleas. The barnacle is different from all related
forms, however, in its fixed and sedentary existence. When and how it
assumed such a way of life is one of the riddles of zoology, the
transitional forms having been lost somewhere in the mists of the past.
Some faint suggestions of a similar manner of life—the waiting in a
fixed place for the sea to bring food—are found among the amphipods,
another group of crustaceans. Some of these spin little webs or cocoons
of natural silk and seaweed fibers; though remaining free to come and go
they spend much of their time within them, taking their food from the
currents. Another amphipod, a Pacific coast species, burrows into
colonies of the tunicate called the sea pork, hollowing out for itself a
chamber in the tough, translucent substance of its host. Lying in this
excavation, it draws currents of sea water over its body and extracts
the food.

However the barnacle became what it is, its larval stages clearly
proclaim its crustacean ancestry, although early zoologists who looked
at its hard shells labeled it a mollusk. The eggs develop inside the
parent’s shell and presently hatch into the sea in milky clouds of
larvae. (The British zoologist Hilary Moore, after studying barnacles on
the Isle of Man, estimated a yearly production of a million million
larvae from a little over half a mile of shore.) Larval life lasts about
three months in the rock barnacle, with several molts and
transformations of form. At first the larva, a little swimming creature
called a nauplius, is indistinguishable from the larva of all other
crustaceans. It is nourished by large globules of fat that not only feed
it but keep it near the surface. As the fat globules dwindle, the larva
begins to swim at lower water levels. Eventually it changes shape,
acquires a pair of shells, six pairs of swimming legs, and a pair of
antennae tipped with suckers. This “cypris” larva looks much like the
adults of another group of crustaceans, the ostracods. Finally, guided
by instinct to yield to gravity and to avoid light, it descends to the
bottom ready to become an adult.

No one knows how many of the baby barnacles riding shoreward on the
waves make a safe landing, how many fail in the quest for a clean, hard
substratum. The settling down of a barnacle larva is not a haphazard
process, but is performed only after a period of seeming deliberation.
Biologists who have observed the act in the laboratory say the larvae
“walk” about on the substratum for as long as an hour, pulling
themselves along by the adhesive tips of the antennae, testing and
rejecting many possible sites before they make a final choice. In nature
they probably drift along in the currents for many days, coming down,
examining the bottom at hand, then drifting on to another.

What are the conditions this infant creature requires? Probably it finds
rock surfaces that are rough and pitted better than very smooth ones;
probably it is repelled by a slimy film of microscopic plants, or even
sometimes by the presence of hydroids or large algae. There is some
reason to believe it may be drawn to existing colonies of barnacles
perhaps through mysterious chemical attraction, detecting substances
released by the adults and following these paths to the colony. Somehow,
suddenly and irrevocably, the choice is made and the young barnacle
cements itself to the chosen surface. Its tissues undergo a complete and
drastic reorganization comparable to the metamorphosis of the larval
butterfly. Then from an almost shapeless mass, the rudiments of the
shell appear, the head and appendages are molded, and within twelve
hours the complete cone of the shell, with all its plates delineated,
has been formed.

Within its cup of lime the barnacle faces a dual growth problem. As a
crustacean enclosed in a chitinous shell, the animal itself must
periodically shed its unyielding skin so that its body may enlarge.
Difficult as it seems, this feat is successfully accomplished, as I am
reminded many times each summer. Almost every container of sea water
that I bring up from the shore is flecked with white semitransparent
objects, gossamer-fine, like the discarded garments of some very small
fairy creature. Seen under the microscope, every detail of structure is
perfectly represented. Evidently the barnacle accomplishes its
withdrawal from the old skin with incredible neatness and thoroughness.
In the little cellophane-like replicas I can count the joints of the
appendages; even the bristles, growing at the bases of the joints, seem
to have been slipped intact out of their casings.

The second problem is that of enlarging the hard cone to accommodate the
growing body. Just how this is done no one seems to be sure, but
probably there is some chemical secretion to dissolve the inner layers
of the shell as new material is added on the outside.

Unless its life is prematurely ended by an enemy, a rock barnacle is
likely to live about three years in the middle and lower tidal zones, or
five years near the upper tidal levels. It can withstand high
temperatures as rocks absorb the heat of the summer sun. Winter cold in
itself is not harmful, but grinding ice may scrape the rocks clean. The
pounding of the surf is part of the normal life of a barnacle; the sea
is not its enemy.

When, through the attacks of fish, predatory worms, or snails, or
through natural causes, the barnacle’s life comes to an end, the shells
remain attached to the rocks. These become shelter for many of the
minute beings of the shore. Besides the baby periwinkles that regularly
live there, the little tide-pool insects often hurry into these shelters
if caught by the rising tide. And lower on the shore, or in tide pools,
the empty shells are likely to house young anemones, tube worms, or even
new generations of barnacles.

The chief enemy of the barnacle on these shores is a brightly colored
carnivorous marine snail, the dog whelk. Although it preys also on
mussels and even occasionally on periwinkles, it seems to prefer
barnacles to all other food, probably because they are more easily
eaten. Like all snails, the whelk possesses a radula. This is not used,
periwinkle fashion, to scrape the rocks, but to drill a hole in any
hard-shelled prey. It can then be pushed through the hole it has made,
to reach and consume the soft parts within. To devour a barnacle,
however, the whelk need only envelop the cone within its fleshy foot and
force the valves open. It also produces a secretion that may have a
narcotic effect. This is a substance called purpurin. In ancient times
the secretion of a related snail in the Mediterranean was the source of
the dye Tyrian purple. The pigment is an organic compound of bromine
that changes in air to form a purple coloring matter.

Although violent surf excludes them, the dog whelks appear in numbers on
most open shores, working up high into the zone of the barnacles and
mussels. By their voracious feeding they may actually alter the balance
of life on the shore. There is a story, for example, about an area where
the whelks had reduced the number of barnacles so drastically that
mussels came in to fill the vacant niche. When the whelks could find no
more barnacles they moved over to the mussels. At first they were
clumsy, not knowing how to eat the new food. Some spent futile days
boring holes in empty shells; others climbed into empty shells and bored
from inside. In time, however, they adjusted to the new prey and ate so
many mussels that the colony began to dwindle. Then the barnacles
settled anew on the rocks and in the end the snails returned to them.

In the middle stretches of shore and even down toward the low tide line
the whelks live under the dripping curtains of weed hanging down from
the rock walls, or within the turf of Irish moss or among the flat,
slippery fronds of the red seaweed, dulse. They cling to the under sides
of overhanging ledges or gather in deep crevices where salt water drips
from weeds and mussels, and little streams of water trickle over the
floor. In all such places the whelks collect in numbers to pair and lay
their eggs in straw-colored containers, each about the size and shape of
a grain of wheat and tough as parchment. Each capsule stands alone,
attached by its own base to the substratum, but usually they are crowded
so closely together that they form a pattern or mosaic.

A snail takes about an hour to make one capsule but seldom completes
more than 10 in twenty-four hours. It may produce as many as 245 in a
season. Although a single capsule may contain as many as a thousand
eggs, most of these are unfertilized nurse eggs that serve as food for
the developing embryos. On maturing, the capsules become purple, being
colored by the same chemical purpurin that is secreted by the adult. In
about four months embryonic life is completed, and from 15 to 20 young
dog whelks emerge from the capsule. Newly hatched young seldom if ever
are found in the zone where the adults live, although the capsules are
deposited and development takes place there. Apparently the waves carry
the young snails down to low tide level or below. Probably many are
washed out to sea and lost, but the survivors are to be found at low
water. They are very small—about one-sixteenth of an inch high—and are
feeding on the tube worm, Spirorbis. Apparently the tubes of these worms
are easier to penetrate than the cones of even very small barnacles. Not
until the dog whelk is about one-fourth or three-eighths of an inch high
does it migrate higher on the shore and begin feeding on barnacles.

Down in the middle sections of the shore the limpets become abundant.
They appear sprinkled over the open rock surfaces, but most live
numerously in shallow tide pools. A limpet wears a simple cone of shell
the size of a fingernail, unobtrusively mottled with soft browns and
grays and blues. It is one of the most ancient and primitive types of
snails, and yet the primitiveness and the simplicity are deceptive. The
limpet is adapted with beautiful precision to the difficult world of the
shore. One expects a snail to have a coiled shell; the limpet has
instead a flattened cone. The periwinkles, which have coiled shells, are
often rolled around by the surf unless they have hidden themselves
securely in crevices or under weeds. The limpet merely presses its cone
against the rocks and the water slides over the sloping contours without
being able to get a grip; the heavier the waves, the more tightly they
press it to the rocks. Most snails have an operculum to shut out enemies
and keep moisture inside; the limpet has one in infancy and then
discards it. The fit of the shell to the substratum is so close that an
operculum is unnecessary; moisture is retained in a little groove that
runs around just inside the shell, and the gills are bathed in a small
sea of their own until the tide returns.

Ever since Aristotle reported that limpets leave their places on the
rocks and go out to feed, people have been recording facts about their
natural history. Their supposed possession of a sort of homing sense has
been widely discussed. Each limpet is said to possess a “home” or spot
to which it always returns. On some types of rock there may be a
recognizable scar, either a discoloration or a depression, to which the
contours of the shell have become precisely fitted. From this home the
limpet wanders out on the high tides to feed, scraping the small algae
off the rocks by licking motions of the radula. After an hour or two of
feeding it returns by approximately the same path, and settles down to
wait out the period of low water.

Many nineteenth-century naturalists tried unsuccessfully to discover by
experiment the nature of the sense involved and the organ in which the
homing sense resides, much as modern scientists try to find a physical
basis for the homing abilities of birds. Most of these studies dealt
with the common British limpet, Patella, and although no one could
explain how the homing instinct worked, there seemed to be little doubt
in anyone’s mind that it did work, and with great precision.

In recent years American scientists have investigated the matter with
statistical methods, and some have concluded that Pacific coast limpets
do not “home” very well at all. (No careful studies of homing have been
made among New England limpets.) Other recent work in California,
however, supports the homing theory. Dr. W. G. Hewatt marked a large
number of limpets and their homes with identifying numbers. He found
that on each high tide all the limpets left home, wandered about for
some two and a half hours, then returned. The direction of their
excursions changed from tide to tide, but they always returned to the
home spot. Dr. Hewatt tried filing a deep groove across one animal’s
homeward path. The limpet halted on the edge of the groove and spent
some time confronting this dilemma, but on the next tide it moved around
the edge of the groove and returned home. Another limpet was taken about
nine inches from its home and the edges of its shell were filed smooth.
It was then released on the same spot. It returned to its home, but
presumably the exact fit of shell to rock home had been destroyed by the
filing and the next day the limpet moved about twenty-one inches away
and did not return. On the fourth day it had taken up a new home and
after eleven days it disappeared.

The limpet’s relations with other inhabitants of the shore are simple.
It lives entirely on the minute algae that coat the rocks with a
slippery film, or on the cortical cells of larger algae. For either
purpose, the radula is effective. The limpet scrapes the rocks so
assiduously that fine particles of stone are found in its stomach; as
the teeth of the radula wear away under hard use they are replaced by
others, pushed up from behind. To the algal spores swarming in the
water, ready to settle down and become sporelings and then adult plants,
the limpets stand in the relation of enemy, since they keep the rocks
scraped fairly clean where they are numerous. By this very act, however,
they render a service to barnacles, making easier the attachment of
their larvae. Indeed, the paths radiating out from a limpet’s home are
sometimes marked by a sprinkling of the starlike shells of young
barnacles.

In its reproductive habits this deceptively simple little snail seems
again to have defied exact observation. It seems certain, however, that
the female limpet does not make protective capsules for her eggs in the
fashion typical of many snails, but commits them directly to the sea.
This is a primitive habit, followed by many of the simpler sea
creatures. Whether the eggs are fertilized within the mother’s body or
while floating at sea is uncertain. The young larvae drift or swim for a
time in the surface waters; the survivors then settle down on rocky
surfaces and metamorphose from the larval to the adult form. Probably
all young limpets are males, later transforming to females—a
circumstance not at all uncommon among mollusks.

Like the animal life of this coast, the seaweeds tell a silent story of
heavy surf. Back from the headlands and in bays and coves the rockweeds
may grow seven feet tall; here on this open coast a seven-inch plant is
a large one. In their sparse and stunted growth, the seaweed invaders of
the upper rocks reveal the stringent conditions of life where waves beat
heavily. In the middle and lower zones some hardy weeds have been able
to establish themselves in greater abundance and profusion. These differ
so greatly from the algae of quieter shores that they are almost a
symbol of the wave-swept coast. Here and there the rocks sloping to the
sea glisten with sheets composed of many individual plants of a curious
seaweed, the purple laver. Its generic name, Porphyra, means “a purple
dye.” It belongs to the red algae, and although it has color variations,
on the Maine coast it is most often a purplish brown. It resembles
nothing so much as little pieces of brown transparent plastic cut out of
someone’s raincoat. In the thinness of its fronds it is like the sea
lettuce, but there is a double layer of tissue, suggesting a child’s
rubber balloon that has collapsed so that the opposite walls are in
contact. At the stem of the “balloon” Porphyra is attached strongly to
the rocks by a cord of interwoven strands—hence its specific name,
“umbilicalis.” Occasionally it is attached to barnacles and very rarely
it grows on other algae instead of directly on hard surfaces. When
exposed at ebb tide under a hot sun, the laver may dry to brittle,
papery layers, but the return of the sea restores the elastic nature of
the plant, which, despite its seeming delicacy, allows it to yield
unharmed to the push and pull of waves.

Down at the lower tidal levels is another curious weed—Leathesia, the
sea potato. It grows in roughly globular form, its surface seamed and
drawn into lobes, forming fleshy, amber-colored tubers that are any size
up to an inch or two in diameter. Usually it grows around the fronds of
moss or another seaweed, seldom if ever attaching directly to the rocks.

The lower rocks and the walls of low tide pools are thickly matted with
algae. Here the red weeds largely supplant the browns that grow higher
up. Along with Irish moss, dulse lines the walls of the pools, its thin,
dull red fronds deeply indented so that they bear a crude resemblance to
the shape of a hand. Minute leaflets sometimes haphazardly attached
along the margins create a strangely tattered appearance. With the water
withdrawn, the dulse mats down against the rocks, paper-thin layers
piled one upon another. Many small starfish, urchins, and mollusks live
within the dulse, as well as in the deeper growth of Irish moss.

Dulse is one of the algae that have a long history of usefulness to man,
as food for himself and his domestic animals. According to an old book
on seaweeds, it used to be said in Scotland that “he who eats of the
Dulse of Guerdie and drinks of the wells of Kildingie will escape all
maladies except black death.” In Great Britain, cattle are fond of it
and sheep wander down into the tidal zone at low water in search of it.
In Scotland, Ireland, and Iceland people eat dulse in various ways, or
dry it and chew it like tobacco; even in the United States, where such
foods are usually ignored, it is possible to buy dulse fresh or dried in
some coastal cities.

In the very lowest pools the Laminarias begin to appear, called
variously the oarweeds, devil’s aprons, sea tangles, and kelps. The
Laminarias belong to the brown algae, which flourish in the dimness of
deep waters and polar seas. The horsetail kelp lives below the tidal
zone with others of the group, but in deep pools also comes over the
threshold, just above the line of the lowest tides. Its broad, flat,
leathery frond is frayed into long ribbons, its surface is smooth and
satiny, and its color richly, glowingly brown.

The water in these deep basins is icy cold, filled with dusky, swaying
plants. To look into such a pool is to behold a dark forest, its foliage
like the leaves of palm trees, the heavy stalks of the kelps also
curiously like the trunks of palms. If one slides his fingers down along
such a stalk and grips just above the holdfast, he can pull up the plant
and find a whole microcosm held within its grasp.

One of these laminarian holdfasts is something like the roots of a
forest tree, branching out, dividing, subdividing, in its very
complexity a measure of the great seas that roar over this plant. Here,
finding secure attachment, are plankton-strainers like mussels and sea
squirts. Small starfish and urchins crowd in under the arching columns
of plant tissue. Predacious worms that have foraged hungrily during the
night return with the daylight and coil themselves into tangled knots in
deep recesses and dark, wet caverns. Mats of sponge spread over the
holdfasts, silently, endlessly at their work of straining the waters of
the pool. One day a larval bryozoan settles here, builds its tiny shell,
then builds another and another, until a film of frosty lace flows
around one of the rootlets of the seaweed. And above all this busy
community, and probably unaffected by it, the brown ribbons of the kelp
roll out into the water, the plant living its own life, growing,
replacing torn tissues as best it may, and in season sending clouds of
reproductive cells streaming into the water. As for the fauna of the
holdfasts, the survival of the kelp is their survival. While it stands
firm their little world holds intact; if it is torn away in a surge of
stormy seas, all will be scattered and many will perish with it.

Among the animals almost always inhabiting the holdfasts of the tide
pool kelps are the brittle stars. These fragile echinoderms are well
named, for even gentle handling is likely to cause them to snap off one
or more arms. This reaction may be useful to an animal living in a
turbulent world, for if an arm is pinned down under a shifting rock, the
owner can break it off and grow a new one. Brittle stars move about
rapidly, using their flexible arms not only in locomotion, but also to
capture small worms and other minute sea life and carry them to their
mouths.

The scale worms also belong to the holdfast community. Their bodies are
protected by a double row of plates forming armament over the back.
Under these large plates is an ordinary segmented worm, bearing
laterally projecting tufts of golden bristles on each segment. There is
a suggestion of primitiveness in the armor plate that is reminiscent of
the quite unrelated chitons. Some of the scale worms have developed
interesting relations with their neighbors. One of the British species
always lives with burrowing animals, although it may change associates
from time to time. When young, it lives with a burrowing brittle star,
probably stealing its food. When older and larger, it moves into the
burrow of a sea cucumber or the tube of the much larger, plumed worm,
Amphitrite.

Often the holdfast grips one of the large horse mussels, which have
heavy shells and may be four or five inches long. The horse mussel lives
only in the deep pools or farther offshore; it is never found in the
upper zones with the smaller blue mussel, and it occurs only on or among
rocks, where its attachment is relatively secure. Sometimes it
constructs a small nest or den as a refuge, using tough byssal threads
spun in typical mussel fashion, with pebbles and shell fragments matted
among the strands.

A small clam common in laminarian holdfasts is the rock-borer, which
some English writers call the “red-nose” because of its red siphons.
Ordinarily it is a boring form, living in cavities it excavates in
limestone, clay, or concrete. Most of the New England rocks are too hard
for boring, and so on this coast the clam lives in crusts of coralline
algae or among the holdfasts of the kelp. On British coasts it is said
to bore rocks that resist mechanical drills. And it does so without
recourse to the chemical secretions some borers use, working entirely by
repeated and endless mechanical abrasion with its sturdy shell.

The smooth and slippery fronds of the kelps support other populations,
less abundant and less varied than those of the holdfasts. On the flat
blades of the oarweeds, as well as on rock faces and under ledges, the
golden-star tunicate, Botryllus, lays its spangled mats. Over a field of
dark green gelatinous substance are sprinkled the little golden stars
that mark the position of clusters of individual tunicates. Each starry
cluster may consist of three to a dozen individual animals radiating
around a central point; many clusters go to make up this continuous,
encrusting mat, which may be six to eight inches long.

Beneath the surface beauty there is marvelous complexity of structure
and function. Over each star there are infinitesimal disturbances in the
water—little currents funneling down, one to each point of the star,
and there being drawn in through a small opening. One heavier,
outward-moving current emerges from the center of the cluster. The
indrawn currents bring in food organisms and oxygen, and the outflowing
current carries away the metabolic waste products of the group.

At first glance a colony of Botryllus may seem no more complex than a
mat of encrusting sponge. In actual fact, however, each of the
individuals comprising the colony is a highly organized creature, in
structure almost identical with such solitary ascidians as the sea grape
and the sea vase, found so abundantly on wharves and sea walls. The
individual Botryllus, however, is only one-sixteenth to one-eighth of an
inch long.

One of these entire colonies, comprising perhaps hundreds of star
clusters (and so perhaps a thousand or more individuals), may arise from
a single fertilized ovum. In the parent colony, eggs are formed early in
the summer, are fertilized, and begin their development while remaining
within the parental tissues. (Each individual Botryllus produces both
eggs and sperms, but since in any one animal they mature at different
times, cross fertilization is insured, the spermatozoa being carried in
the sea water and drawn in along with the water currents.) Presently the
parent releases minute larvae shaped like tadpoles, with long, swimming
tails. For perhaps an hour or two such a larva drifts and swims, then
settles down on some ledge or weed and makes itself fast. Soon the
tissues of the tail are absorbed and all suggestion of ability to swim
is lost. Within two days the heart begins to beat in that curious
tunicate rhythm—first driving the blood in one direction, pausing
briefly, then reversing the direction of the flow. After nearly a
fortnight, this small individual has completed the formation of its own
body and begins to bud off other individuals. These, in turn, bud off
others. Each new creature has its separate opening for the intake of
water, but all retain connections with a central vent for the outflow of
wastes. When the individuals clustered around this common opening become
too crowded, one or more newly formed buds are pushed out into the
surrounding mat of gelatinous tissue, where they begin new star
clusters. In this way the colony spreads.

The intertidal zone is sometimes invaded by a deep-water laminarian, the
sea colander. It is a representative of those brown seaweeds that
flourish in the cold waters of the Arctic, and has come down from
Greenland as far as Cape Cod. Its appearance is strikingly different
from that of the sea moss and horsetail kelp among which it sometimes
appears. The wide frond is pierced by innumerable perforations; these
are foreshadowed in the young plant by conical papillae, which later
break through to form the perforations.

Beyond the rims of the lowest pools, growing on the rock walls that
slope away steeply into deep water, is another laminarian seaweed,
Alaria, the winged kelp, called the murlin in Great Britain. Its long,
ruffled, streaming fronds rise with each surge and fall as the water
pours away seaward. The fertile pinnae, in which the reproductive cells
mature, are borne at the base of the frond, for in a plant so exposed to
violent surf this location is safer than the tips of the main blade. (In
the rockweeds, living higher on the shore and less subject to savage
wave action, the reproductive cells are formed at the tips of the
fronds.) Almost more than any of the other seaweeds, Alaria is a plant
conditioned to constant pounding by the waves. Standing on the outermost
point that gives safe footing, one can see its dark ribbons streaming
out into the water, being tugged and tossed and pounded. The larger and
older plants become much frayed and worn, the margins of the blade
splitting or the tip of the midrib being worn off. By such concessions
the plant saves some of the strain on its holdfasts. The stipe can
withstand a relatively enormous pull, but severe storms tear away many
plants.

Still farther down, one can sometimes and in some places get a glimpse
of the dark, mysterious forests of the kelps, where they go down into
deep water. Sometimes these giant kelps are cast ashore after a storm.
They have a stiff, strong stipe from which the long ribbon of the frond
extends. The sea tangle or sugar kelp, _Laminaria saccharina_, has a
stipe up to 4 feet long, supporting a relatively narrow frond (6 to 18
inches wide) that may extend out and upward into the sea as much as 30
feet. The margin is greatly frilled and a powdery white substance
(mannitol, a sugar) forms on the dried fronds. The long-stalked
laminaria (_Laminaria longicruris_) has a stem comparable to the trunk
of a small tree, being 6 to 12 feet long. The frond is up to 3 feet wide
and 20 feet long, but may sometimes be shorter than the stipe.

The stands of sea tangles and long-stalked laminarias are, in their way,
an Atlantic counterpart of the great submarine jungles of the Pacific,
where the kelps rise like giant forest trees, 150 feet from the floor of
the sea to the surface.

On all rocky coasts, this laminarian zone just below low water has been
one of the least-known regions of the sea. We know little about what
lives here throughout the year. We do not know whether some of the forms
that disappear from the intertidal area in winter may merely move down
into this zone. And perhaps some of the species we think have died out
in a particular region, perhaps because of temperature changes, have
gone down among the Laminarias. The area is obviously difficult to
explore, with heavy seas breaking there most of the time. Such an area
on the west coast of Scotland was, however, explored by helmet divers
working with the British biologist, J. A. Kitching. Below the zone
occupied by Alaria and the horsetail kelp, from about two fathoms below
low water and beyond, the divers moved through a dense forest of the
larger Laminarias. From the vertical stipes an immense canopy of fronds
was spread above their heads. Although the sun shone brightly at the
surface, the divers were almost in darkness as they pushed through this
forest. Between three and six fathoms below low water of the spring
tides the forest opened out, so that the men could walk between the
plants without great difficulty. There the light was stronger, and
through misty water they could see this more open “park” extending
farther down the sloping floor of the sea. Among the holdfasts and
stipes of the laminarias, as among the roots and trunks of a terrestrial
forest, was a dense undergrowth, here formed of various red algae. And
as small rodents and other creatures have their dens and runways under
the forest trees, so a varied and abundant fauna lived on and among the
holdfasts of the great seaweeds.

In quieter waters, protected from the heavy surf of coasts that face the
open ocean, the seaweeds dominate the shore, occupying every inch of
space that the conditions of tidal rise and fall allow them and by the
sheer force of abundant and luxuriant growth forcing other shore
inhabitants to accommodate to their pattern.

Although the same bands of life are spread between the tide lines
whether the coast be open or sheltered, in their relative development
the zones vary greatly on the two types of shore.

Above the high tide line there is little change and on the shores of
bays and estuaries, as elsewhere, the microplants blacken the rocks and
the lichens come down and tentatively approach the sea. Below high water
of spring tides, pioneering barnacles trace occasional white streaks in
token occupation of the zone they dominate on open coasts. A few
periwinkles graze on the upper rocks. But on sheltered coasts the whole
band of shore marked out by the tides of the moon’s quarters is occupied
by a swaying submarine forest, sensitive to the movements of the waves
and the tidal currents. The trees of the forest are the large seaweeds
known as the rockweeds or sea wracks, stout of form and rubbery of
texture. Here all other life exists within their shelter—a shelter so
hospitable to small things needing protection from drying air, from
rain, and from the surge of the running tides and the waves, that the
life of these shores is incredibly abundant.

When covered at high tide, the rockweeds stand erect, rising and swaying
with a life borrowed from the sea. Then, to one standing at the edge of
a flooding tide, the only sign of their presence may be a scattering of
dark patches on the water close inshore, where the tips of the weeds
reach up to the surface. Down below those floating tips small fishes
swim, passing between the weeds as birds fly through a forest, sea
snails creep along the fronds, and crabs climb from branch to branch of
the swaying plants. It is a fantastic jungle, mad in a Lewis Carroll
sort of way. For what proper jungle, twice every twenty-four hours,
begins to sag lower and lower and finally lies prostrate for several
hours, only to rise again? Yet this is precisely what the rockweed
jungles do. When the tide has retreated from the sloping rocks, when it
has left the miniature seas of the tide pools, the rockweeds lie flat on
the horizontal surfaces in layer above layer of sodden, rubbery fronds.
From the sheer rock faces they hang down in a heavy curtain, holding the
wetness of the sea, and nothing under their protective cover ever dries
out.

By day the sunlight filters through the jungle of rockweeds to reach its
floor only in shifting patches of shadow-flecked gold; by night the
moonlight spreads a silver ceiling above the forest—a ceiling streaked
and broken by the flowing tide streams; beneath it the dark fronds of
the weeds sway in a world unquiet with moving shadows.

But the flow of time through this submarine forest is marked less by the
alternation of light and darkness than by the rhythm of the tides. The
lives of its creatures are ruled by the presence or absence of water; it
is not the fall of dusk or the coming of dawn but the turn of the tide
that brings transforming change to their world.

As the tide falls the tips of the weeds, lacking support, float out
horizontally across the surface. Then the cloud shadows darken and a
deepening gloom settles over the floor of the forest. As the overlying
layer of water thins and gradually drains away, the weeds, still
stirring, still responsive to each pulsation of the tide, drift closer
to the rock floor and finally lie prostrate upon it, all their life and
movement in abeyance.

By day an interval of quiet settles over the jungles of the land, when
the hunters lie in their dens, and the weak and the slow hide from the
daylight; so on the shore a waiting lull comes with every ebbing of the
tide.

The barnacles furl their nets and swing shut the twin doors that exclude
the drying air and hold within the moisture of the sea. The mussels and
the clams withdraw their feeding tubes or siphons and close their
shells. Here and there a starfish, having invaded the forest from below
on the previous high tide and incautiously lingered, still clasps a
mussel within its sinuous arms, gripping the shells with the
sucker-tipped ends of scores of slender tube feet. Pushing under and
among the horizontal fronds of the weed, as a man would make his way
with difficulty through trees blown down by a storm, a few crabs are
active, digging their little slanting pits to expose the clams buried in
the mud. Then they crack away pieces of shell with their heavy claws,
while they hold the clam in the tips of the walking legs.

A few hunters and scavengers come down from the upper tidelands. The
little gray-cloaked tide-pool insect, Anurida, wanders down from the
upper shore and scurries over the rock floor, hunting out mussels with
gaping shells, or dead fish, or fragments of crabs left by gulls. Crows
walk about over the weeds; they sort them over strand by strand until
they find a periwinkle hidden in the weed, or clinging to a rock that
lies under the sodden cloak of the algae. Then the crow holds the shell
in the strong toes of one foot, while with its beak it deftly extracts
the snail.

The pulse of the returning tide at first beats gently. The advance
during the beginning of the six-hour rise to high-water mark is slow, so
that in two hours only a quarter of the intertidal zone has been
covered. Then the pace of the water quickens. For the next two hours the
tidal currents are stronger and the rising waters advance twice as far
as in the first period; then again the tide slackens its pace for a
leisurely advance over the upper shore. The rockweeds, covering the
middle band of shore, receive the shock of heavier waves than the
relatively bare shore above, yet their cushioning effect is so great
that the animals that cling to them or live on the rock floor below them
are far less affected by the surf than those of the upper rocks, or
those of the zone below which experience all the heavy drag from the
backwash of waves that break as the tide is advancing rapidly over the
middle shore.

Darkness brings the jungles of the land to life, but the night of the
rockweed jungles is the time of the rising tide, when water pours in
under the masses of weed, stirring out of their low tide quiescence all
the inhabitants of this forest.

As the water from the open sea floods the floor of the weed jungles,
shadows flicker again above the ivory cones of the barnacles as the
almost invisible nets reach out to gather what the tide has brought. The
shells of clams and mussels again open slightly and little vortices of
water are drawn down, funneling into the complex straining mechanisms
within the shellfish all the little spheres of marine vegetables that
are their food.

Nereid worms emerge from the mud and swim off to other hunting grounds;
if they are to reach them they must elude the fishes that have come in
with the tide, for on the flood tide the rockweed forests become one
with the sea and with its hungry predators.

Shrimp flicker in and out through the open spaces of the forest; they
seek small crustaceans, baby fish, or minute bristle worms, but in their
turn are pursued by following fish. Starfish move up from the great
meadows of sea moss lower on the shore, hunting the mussels that grow on
the floor of the forest.

The crows and the gulls are driven out of the tidelands. The little
gray, velvet-cloaked insects move up the shore or, finding a secure
crevice, wrap themselves in a glistening blanket of air to wait for the
falling of the tide.

The rockweeds that create this intertidal forest are descendants of some
of the earth’s most ancient plants. Along with the great kelps lower on
the shore, they belong to the group of brown seaweeds, in which the
chlorophyll is masked by other pigments. The Greek name for the brown
algae—the _Phaeophyceae_—means “the dusky or shadowy plants.”
According to some theories, they arose in that early period when the
earth was still enveloped in heavy clouds and illuminated only by feeble
rays of sunlight. Even today the brown seaweeds are plants of dim and
shadowed places—the deep submarine slopes where giant kelps form dusky
jungles and the dark rock ledges from which the oarweeds send their long
ribbons streaming into the tides. And the rockweeds that grow between
the tide lines do so on northern coasts, visited often by cloud and fog.
Their rare invasions of the sunny tropics are accomplished under a
protective cover of deep water.

The brown algae may have been the first of the sea plants to colonize
the shore. They learned to adjust themselves to alternating periods of
submersion and exposure on ancient coastlines swept by strong tides;
they came as close to a land existence as they could without actually
leaving the tidal zone.

One of the modern rockweeds, the channeled wrack of European shores,
lives at the extreme upper edge of the tidelands. In some places its
only contact with the sea is an occasional drenching with spray. In sun
and air its fronds become blackened and crisp so that one would think it
had surely been killed, but with the return of the sea its normal color
and texture are restored.

The channeled wrack does not grow on the American Atlantic coast, but
there a related plant, the spiral wrack, comes almost as far out of the
sea. It is a weed of low growth, whose short sturdy fronds end in
turgid, rough-textured swellings. Its heaviest growth is above the
high-water mark of the neap tides, so of all the rockweeds it lives
closest inshore or nearest the water line of exposed ledges. Although it
spends nearly three-fourths of its life out of water, it is a true
seaweed and its splashes of orange-brown color on the upper shore are a
symbol of the threshold of the sea.

These plants, however, are but the outlying fringe of the intertidal
forest, which is an almost pure stand of two other rockweeds—the
knotted wrack and the bladder wrack. Both are sensitive indicators of
the force of the surf. The knotted wrack can live in profusion only on
shores protected from heavy waves, and in such places is the dominant
weed. Back from the headlands, on the shores of bays and tidal rivers
where surf and tidal surge are subdued by remoteness from the open sea,
the knotted wrack may grow taller than the tallest man, though its
fronds are slender as straws. The long surge of the swell in sheltered
water places no great strain on its elastic strands. Swellings or
vesicles on the main stems or fronds contain oxygen and other gases
secreted by the plant; these act as buoys when the weeds are covered by
the tide. The bladder wrack has greater tensile strength and so can
endure the sharp tugging and pulling of moderately heavy surf. Although
it is much shorter than the knotted wrack it also needs the help of air
bladders to rise in the water. In this species the bladders are paired,
one of each pair on either side of the strong midrib; the bladders,
however, may fail to develop where the plants are subjected to much
pounding by surf, or when they grow at the lower levels of the tidal
zone. At some seasons the ends of the branches of this wrack swell into
bulbous, almost heart-shaped structures; from these the reproductive
cells are liberated.

The sea wracks have no roots, but instead grip the rocks by means of a
flattened, disc-like expansion of their tissues. It is almost as though
the base of each weed melted a little, spreading over the rock and then
congealing, thereby creating a union so firm that only the thundering
seas of a very heavy storm, or the grinding of shore ice, can tear away
the plants. The seaweeds do not have a land plant’s need of roots to
extract minerals from the soil, for they are bathed almost continuously
by the sea and so live within a solution of all the minerals they need
for life. Nor do they need the rigid supporting stem or trunk by which a
land plant reaches upward into sunlight—they have only to yield
themselves to the water. And so their structure is simple—merely a
branching frond arising from the holdfast, with no division into roots
and stems and leaves.

Looking at the prostrate, low tide forests of the rockweeds that cover
the shore with a many-layered blanket, one would suppose that the plants
must spring from every available inch of rock surface. But actually the
forest, when it rises and comes to life with the flooding tide, is
fairly open and sprinkled with clearings. On my own shore in Maine,
where the tides rise and fall over a wide expanse of intertidal rock,
and the knotted wrack spreads its dark blanket between the high and low
waters of the neap tides, the areas of open rock around the holdfast of
each plant are sometimes as much as a foot in diameter. From the middle
of such a clearing the plant rises, its fronds dividing repeatedly,
until the upper branchings extend out over an area several feet across.

Far below, at the base of the fronds that swing with the undulation of
the passing waves, the rocks are stained with vivid hues, painted in
crimson and emerald by the activities of sea plants so minute that even
in their thousands they seem but part of the rock, a surface revelation
of jewel tones within. The green patches are growths of one of the green
algae. The individual plants are so small that only a strong lens could
reveal their identity—lost, as individual blades of grass are lost in
the lush expanse of a meadow, in the spreading verdant stain created by
the mass. Amid the green are other patches of a rich and intensely
glowing red, and again the growth is not separable from the mineral
floor. It is a creation of one of the red seaweeds, a form that secretes
lime in thin and closely adhering crusts over the rocks.

Against this background of glowing color the barnacles stand out with
sharp distinctness, and in the clear water that pours through the forest
like liquid glass, their cirri flicker in and out—extending, grasping,
withdrawing, taking from the inpouring tides those minute atoms of life
that our eyes cannot see. Around the bases of small wave-rounded
boulders the mussels lie as though at anchor, held by gleaming lines
spun by their own tissues. Their paired blue shells stand a little
apart, the space between them revealing pale brown tissues with fluted
edges.

Some parts of the forest are less open. In these the clumps of rockweeds
rise from a short turf or undergrowth consisting chiefly of the flat
fronds of Irish moss, with sometimes dark mats of another plant with the
texture of Turkish toweling. And like a tropical jungle with its
orchids, this sea forest has the counterpart of airplants in the
epiphytic tufts of a red seaweed that grows on the fronds of the knotted
wrack. Polysiphonia seems to have lost—or perhaps it never had—the
ability to attach directly to the rocks and so its dark red balls of
finely divided fronds cling to the wracks, and by them are lifted up
into the water.

In the areas between the rocks and under loose boulders a substance that
is neither sand nor mud has accumulated. It consists of minute and
water-ground bits of the remains of sea creatures—the shells of
mollusks, the spines of sea urchins, the opercula of snails. Clams live
in pockets of this soft substance, digging down until they are buried to
the tips of their siphons. Around the clams the mud is alive with ribbon
worms, thin as threads, scarlet of color, each a small hunter searching
out minute bristle worms and other prey. Here also are the nereids,
given the Latin name for sea nymph because of their grace and iridescent
beauty. The nereids are active predators that leave their burrows at
night to search for small worms, crustaceans, and other prey. In the
dark of the moon certain species gather at the surface in immense
spawning swarms. Curious legends have become associated with them. In
New England the so-called clam worm, _Nereis virens_, often takes
shelter in empty clam shells. Fishermen, accustomed to finding it thus,
believe it is the male clam.

Crabs of thumbnail size live in the weed and come down to hunt in these
areas. They are the young of the green crab; the adults live below the
tide lines on this shore except when they come into the shelter of the
weeds to molt. The young crabs search the mud pockets, digging out pits
and probing for clams that are about their own size.

Clams, crabs, and worms are part of a community of animals whose lives
are closely interrelated. The crabs and the worms are the active
predators, the beasts of prey. The clams, the mussels, and the barnacles
are the plankton feeders, able to live sedentary lives because their
food is brought to them by each tide. By an immutable law of nature, the
plankton feeders as a group are more numerous than those that prey on
them. Besides the clams and other large species, the rockweeds shelter
thousands of small beings, all of them busy with filtering devices of
varying design, straining out the plankton of each tide. There is, for
example, a small, plumed worm called Spirorbis. Seeing it for the first
time, one would certainly say that it is no worm, but a snail, for it is
a tube-builder, having learned some feat of chemistry that allows it to
secrete about itself a calcareous shell or tube. The tube is not much
larger than the head of a pin and is wound in a flat, closely coiled
spiral of chalky whiteness, its form strongly suggesting some of the
land snails. The worm lives permanently within the tube, which is
cemented to weed or rock, thrusting out its head from time to time to
filter food animals through the fine filaments of its crown of
tentacles. These exquisitely delicate and filmy tentacles serve not only
as snares to entangle food but as gills for breathing. Among them is a
structure like a long-stemmed goblet; when the worm draws back into its
tube the goblet or operculum closes the opening like a neatly fitted
trap door.

The fact that the tube worms have managed to live in the intertidal zone
for perhaps millions of years is evidence of a sensitive adjustment of
their way of life, on the one hand to conditions within the surrounding
world of the rockweeds, on the other to vast tidal rhythms linked with
the movements of earth, moon, and sun.

In the inmost coils of the tube are little chains of beads wrapped in
cellophane—or so they appear. There are about twenty beads in a chain.
The beads are developing eggs. When the embryos have developed into
larvae, the cellophane membranes rupture and the young are sent forth
into the sea. By keeping the embryonic stages within the parental tube
Spirorbis protects its young from enemies and assures that the infant
worms will be in the intertidal zone when they are ready to settle.
Their period of active swimming is short—at most an hour or so, and
well contained within a single rising or falling of the tide. They are
stout little creatures with bright red eye spots; perhaps the larval
eyes help in locating a place for attachment but in any event they
degenerate soon after the larva settles.

In the laboratory, under my microscope, I have watched the larvae
swimming about busily, all their little bristles whirring, then
sometimes descending to the glass floor of their dish to bump it with
their heads. Why and how do the infant tube worms settle in the same
sort of place their ancestors chose? Apparently they make many trials,
reacting more favorably to smooth surfaces than to rough, and displaying
a strong instinct of gregariousness that leads them to settle by
preference where others of their kind are already established. These
tendencies help to keep the tube worms within their comparatively
restricted world. There is also a response, not to familiar
surroundings, but to cosmic forces. Every fortnight, on the moon’s
quarter, a batch of eggs is fertilized and taken into the brood chamber
to begin its development. And at the same time the larvae that have been
made ready during the previous fortnight are expelled into the sea. By
this timing—this precise synchronizing with the phases of the moon—the
release of the young always occurs on a neap tide, when neither the rise
nor the fall of the water is of great extent, and even for so small a
creature the chances of remaining within the rockweed zone are good.

Sea snails of the periwinkle tribe inhabit the upper branches of the
weeds at high tide or take shelter under them when the tide is out. The
orange and yellow and olive-green colors of their smoothly rounded,
flat-topped shells suggest the fruiting bodies of the rockweeds, and
perhaps the resemblance is protective. The smooth periwinkle, unlike the
rough, is still an animal of the sea; the salty dampness it requires is
provided by the wet and dripping fronds of the seaweeds when the tide is
out. It lives by scraping off the cortical cells of the algae, seldom if
ever descending to the rocks to feed on the surface film as related
species do. Even in its spawning habits the smooth periwinkle is a
creature of the rockweeds. There is no shedding of eggs into the sea, no
period of juvenile drifting in the currents. All the stages of its life
are lived in the rockweeds—it knows no other home.

Curious about the early stages of this abundant snail, I have gone down
into my own rockweed forests on the summer low tides to search for them.
Sorting over the prostrate wrack, examining its long strands for some
signs of what I sought, I have occasionally been rewarded by discovering
transparent masses of a substance like tough jelly, tightly adhering to
the fronds. They averaged perhaps a quarter-inch long and half as wide.
Within each mass I could see the eggs, round as bubbles, dozens of them
embedded in the confining matrix. One such egg mass that I carried to
the microscope contained a developing embryo within the membranes of
each egg. They were clearly molluscan, but so undifferentiated that I
could not have said what mollusk lay nascent within. In the cold waters
of its home, about a month would intervene from the egg to the hatching
stage, but in the warmer temperatures of the laboratory the remaining
days of development were reduced to hours. The following day each sphere
contained a tiny baby periwinkle, its shell completely formed,
apparently ready to emerge and take up its life on the rocks. How do
they hold their places there, I wondered, as the weeds sway in the tides
and occasional storms send waves pounding in over the shore? Later in
the summer there was at least a partial answer. I noticed that many of
the air vesicles of the wracks bore little perforations, as though they
had been chewed or punctured by some animal. I slit some of these
vesicles carefully so that I might look inside. There, secure in a
green-walled chamber, were the babies of the smooth periwinkle—from two
to half a dozen of them sharing the refuge of a single vesicle, secure
alike against storms and enemies.

Down near the low water of the neap tides the hydroid Clava spreads its
velvet patches on the fronds of the knotted wrack and the bladder wrack.
Rising from its point of attachment like a plant from its root clump,
each cluster of tubular animals looks like nothing so much as a spray of
delicate flowers, shading from pink to rose and fringed with petal-like
tentacles, all nodding in the water currents as woodland flowers nod in
a gentle wind. But the swaying movements are purposive ones by which the
hydroid reaches into the currents for food. In its way it is a voracious
little jungle beast, all its tentacles studded with batteries of
stinging cells that can be shot into its victims like poisoned arrows.
When, in their ceaseless movements, the tentacles come into contact with
a small crustacean or worm or the larva of some sea creature, a shower
of darts is released; the prey animal becomes paralyzed and is seized
and conveyed to the mouth by the tentacles.

Each of these colonies now established on the wracks came from a little
swimming larva that once settled there, shed the hairy cilia by which it
swam, attached itself, and began to elongate into a little plantlike
being. A crown of tentacles formed at its free end. In time, from the
base of the tubular creature, a seeming root, or stolon, began to creep
over the rockweed, budding off new tubes, each complete with mouth and
tentacles. So all the numerous individuals of the colony originated in a
single fertilized ovum that yielded the wandering larva.

In season, the plantlike hydroid must reproduce, but by a strange
circumstance it cannot itself yield the germ cells that would give rise
to new larvae, for it can reproduce only non-sexually, by budding. So
there is a curious alternation of generations, found again and again in
many members of the large coelenterate group to which the hydroids
belong, by which no individual produces offspring that resemble itself,
but each is like the grandparental generation. Just below the tentacles
of an individual Clava the buds of the new generation are produced—the
alternate generation that intervenes between colonies of hydroids. They
are pendent clusters shaped like berries. In some species the berries,
or medusa buds, would drop from the parent and swim away—tiny,
bell-shaped things like minute jellyfish. Clava, however, does not
release its medusae but keeps them attached. Pink buds are male medusae;
purple ones are female. When they are mature, each sheds its eggs or
sperm into the sea. When fertilized, the eggs begin to divide and
through their development yield the little protoplasmic threads of
larvae, which swim off through unknown waters to found some distant
colonies.

During many days of midsummer, the incoming tides bring the round
opalescent forms of the moon jellies. Most of these are in the weakened
condition that accompanies the fulfillment of their life cycle; their
tissues are easily torn by the slightest turbulence of water, and when
the tide carries them in over the rockweeds and then withdraws, leaving
them there like crumpled cellophane, they seldom survive the tidal
interval.

Each year they come, sometimes only a few at a time, sometimes in
immense numbers. Drifting shoreward, their silent approach is unheralded
even by the cries of sea birds, who have no interest in the jellyfish as
food, for their tissues are largely water.

During much of the summer they have been drifting offshore, white gleams
in the water, sometimes assembling in hundreds along the line of meeting
of two currents, where they trace winding lines in the sea along these
otherwise invisible boundaries. But toward autumn, nearing the end of
life, the moon jellies offer no resistance to the tidal currents, and
almost every flood tide brings them in to the shore. At this season the
adults are carrying the developing larvae, holding them in the flaps of
tissue that hang from the under surface of the disc. The young are
little pear-shaped creatures; when finally they are shaken loose from
the parent (or freed by the stranding of the parent on the shore), they
swim about in the shallow water, sometimes swarms of them together.
Finally they seek bottom and each becomes attached by the end that was
foremost when it swam. As a tiny plantlike growth, about an eighth of an
inch high and bearing long tentacles, this strange child of the delicate
moon jelly survives the winter storms. Then constrictions begin to
encircle its body, so that it comes to resemble a pile of saucers. In
the spring these “saucers” free themselves one after another and swim
away, each a tiny jellyfish, fulfilling the alternation of the
generations. North of Cape Cod these young grow to their full diameter
of six to ten inches by July; they mature and produce eggs and sperm
cells by late July or August; and in August and September they begin to
yield the larvae that will become the attached generation. By the end of
October all of the season’s jellyfish have been destroyed by storms, but
their offspring survive, attached to the rocks near the low tide line or
on nearby bottoms offshore.

If the moon jellies are symbols of the coastal waters, seldom straying
more than a few miles offshore, it is otherwise with the great red
jellyfish, Cyanea, which in its periodic invasions of bays and harbors
links the shallow green waters with the bright distances of the open
sea. On fishing banks a hundred or more miles offshore one may see its
immense bulk drifting at the surface as it swims lazily, its tentacles
sometimes trailing for fifty feet or more. These tentacles spell danger
for almost all sea creatures in their path and even for human beings, so
powerful is the sting. Yet young cod, haddock, and sometimes other
fishes adopt the great jellyfish as a “nurse,” traveling through the
shelterless sea under the protection of this large creature and somehow
unharmed by the nettle-like stings of the tentacles.

Like Aurelia, the red jellyfish is an animal only of the summer seas,
for whom the autumnal storms bring the end of life. Its offspring are
the winter plantlike generation, duplicating in almost every detail the
life history of the moon jelly. On bottoms no more than two hundred feet
deep (and usually much less), little half-inch wisps of living tissue
represent the heritage of the immense red jellyfish. They can survive
the cold and the storms that the larger summer generation cannot endure;
when the warmth of spring begins to dissipate the icy cold of the winter
sea they will bud off the tiny discs that, by some inexplicable magic of
development, grow in a single season into the adult jellyfish.

As the tide falls below the rockweeds, the surf of the sea’s edge washes
over the cities of the mussels. Here, within these lower reaches of the
intertidal zone, the blue-black shells form a living blanket over the
rocks. The cover is so dense, so uniform in its texture and composition,
that often one scarcely realizes that this is not rock, but living
animals. In one place the shells, unimaginable in number, are no more
than a quarter of an inch long; in another the mussels may be several
times as large. But always they are packed so closely together, neighbor
against neighbor, that it is hard to see how any one of them can open
its shells enough to receive the currents of water that bring its food.
Every inch, every hundredth of an inch of space, has been taken over by
a living creature whose survival depends on gaining a foothold on this
rocky shore.

The presence of each individual mussel in this crowded assemblage is
evidence of the achievement of its unconscious, juvenile purpose, an
expression of the will-to-live embodied in a minute transparent larva
once set adrift in the sea to find its own solid bit of earth for
attachment, or to die.

The setting adrift takes place on an astronomical scale. Along the
American Atlantic coast the spawning season of the mussels is
protracted, extending from April into September. What induces a wave of
spawning at any particular time is unknown, but it seems clear that the
spawning of a few mussels releases chemical substances into the water,
and that these react on all mature individuals in the area and set them
to pouring their eggs and milt into the sea. The female mussels
discharge the eggs in a continuing, almost endless stream of short
little rod-like masses—hundreds, thousands, millions of cells, each
potentially an adult mussel. One large female may release up to
twenty-five million at a single spawning. In quiet water the eggs drift
gently to the bottom, but in the normal conditions of surf or swiftly
moving currents they are at once possessed by the sea and carried away.

Simultaneously with the outflow of eggs, the water has become cloudy
with the milt poured into the water by the male mussels, the number of
individual sperm cells defying all attempts at calculation. Dozens of
them cluster about a single egg, pressing against it, seeking entrance.
But one male cell, and one only, is successful. With the entrance of
this first sperm cell, an instantaneous physical change takes place in
the outer membranes of the egg, and from this moment it cannot again be
penetrated by a spermatozoan.

After the union of the male and female nuclei, the division of the
fertilized cell proceeds rapidly. In less than the interval between a
high and a low tide, the egg has been transformed into a little ball of
cells, propelling itself through the water with glittering hairs, or
cilia. In about twenty-four hours, it has assumed an odd, top-shaped
form that is common to the larvae of all young mollusks and annelid
worms. A few days more and it has become flattened and elongated and
swims rapidly by vibrations of a membrane called the velum; it crawls
over solid surfaces, and senses contact with foreign objects. Its
journey through the sea is far from being a solitary one; in a square
meter of surface over a bed of adult mussels there may be as many as
170,000 swimming larvae.

The thin larval shell takes form, but soon it is replaced by another,
double-valved as in adult mussels. By this time the velum has
disintegrated, and the mantle, foot, and other organs of the adult have
begun their development.

From early summer these tiny shelled creatures live in prodigious
numbers in the seaweeds of the shore. In almost every bit of weed I pick
up for microscopic examination I find them creeping about, exploring
their world with the long tubular organ called the foot, which bears an
odd resemblance to the trunk of an elephant. The infant mussel uses it
to test out objects in its path, to creep over level or steeply sloping
rocks or through seaweeds, or even to walk on the under side of the
surface film of quiet water. Soon, however, the foot assumes a new
function: it aids in the work of spinning the tough silken threads that
anchor a mussel to whatever offers a solid support and insurance against
being washed away in the surf.

The very existence of the mussel fields of the low tide zone is evidence
that this chain of circumstances has proceeded unbroken to its
consummation untold millions upon millions of times. Yet, for every
mussel surviving upon the rocks, there must have been millions of larvae
whose setting forth into the sea had a disastrous end. The system is in
delicate balance; barring catastrophe, the forces that destroy neither
outweigh nor are outweighed by those that create, and over the years of
a man’s life, as over the ages of recent geologic time, the total number
of mussels on the shore probably has remained about the same.

In much of this low-water area the mussels live in intimate association
with one of the red seaweeds, Gigartina, a plant of low-growing, bushy
form and almost cartilaginous texture. Plants and mussels unite
inseparably to form a tough mat. Very small mussels may grow about the
plants so abundantly as to obscure their basal attachment to the rocks.
Both the stems and the repeatedly subdivided branches of the seaweed are
astir with life, but with life on so small a scale that the human eye
can see its details only with the aid of a microscope.

Snails, some with brightly banded and deeply sculptured shells, crawl
along the fronds, browsing on microscopic vegetable matter. Many of the
basal stems of the weed are thickly encrusted with the bryozoan sea
lace, Membranipora; from all its compartments the minute, be-tentacled
heads of the resident creatures are thrust out. Another bryozoan of
coarser growth, Flustrella, also forms mats investing the broken stems
and stubble of the red weed, the substance of its own growth giving such
a stem almost the thickness of a pencil. Rough hairs or bristles
protrude from the mat, so that much foreign matter adheres to it. Like
the sea laces, however, it is formed of hundreds of small, adjacent
compartments. From one after another of these, as I watch through my
microscope, a stout little creature cautiously emerges, then unfurls its
crown of filmy tentacles as one would open an umbrella. Threadlike worms
creep over the bryozoan, winding among the bristles like snakes through
coarse stubble. A tiny, cyclopean crustacean, with one glittering ruby
eye, runs ceaselessly and rather clumsily over the colony, apparently
disturbing the inhabitants, for when one of them feels the touch of the
blundering crustacean it quickly folds its tentacles and withdraws into
its compartment.

In the upper branches of this jungle formed by the red weed, there are
many nests or tubes occupied by amphipod crustaceans known as Amphithoë.
These small creatures have the appearance of wearing cream-colored
jerseys brightly splotched with brownish red; in each goatlike face are
set two conspicuous eyes and two pairs of hornlike antennae. The nests
are as firmly and skillfully constructed as a bird’s but are subject to
far more continuous use, for these amphipods are weak swimmers and
ordinarily seem loath to leave their nests. They lie in their snug
little sacs, often with the heads and upper parts of their bodies
protruding. The water currents that pass through their seaweed home
bring them small plant fragments and thus solve the problem of
subsistence.

For most of the year Amphithoë lives singly, one to a nest. Early in the
summer the males visit the females (who greatly outnumber them) and
mating occurs within the nest. As the young develop the mother cares for
them in a brood-pouch formed by the appendages of her abdomen. Often,
while carrying her young, she emerges almost completely from her nest
and vigorously fans currents of water through the pouch.

The eggs yield embryos, the embryos become larvae; but still the mother
holds and cares for them until their small bodies have so developed that
they are able to set forth into the seaweeds, to spin their own nests
out of the fibers of plants and the silken threads mysteriously
fashioned in their own bodies, and to feed and fend for themselves.

As her young become ready for independent life, the mother shows
impatience to be rid of the swarm in her nest. Using claws and antennae,
she pushes them to the rim and with shoves and nudges tries to expel
them. The young cling with hooked and bristled claws to the walls and
doorway of the familiar nursery. When finally thrust out they are likely
to linger nearby; when the mother incautiously emerges, they leap to
attach themselves to her body and so be drawn again into the security of
their accustomed nest, until maternal impatience once more becomes
strong.

Even the young just out of the brood-sac build their own nests and
enlarge them as their growth requires. But the young seem to spend less
time than the adults do inside their nests, and to creep about more
freely over the weeds. It is common to see several tiny nests built
close to the home of a large amphipod; perhaps the young like to stay
close to the mother even after they have been ejected from her nest.

At low tide the water falls below the rockweeds and the mussels and
enters a broad band clothed with the reddish-brown turf of the Irish
moss. The time of its exposure to the atmosphere is so brief, the
retreat of the sea so fleeting, that the moss retains a shining
freshness, a wetness, and a sparkle that speak of its recent contact
with the surf. Perhaps because we can visit this area only in that brief
and magical hour of the tide’s turning, perhaps because of the nearness
of waves breaking on rocky rims, dissolving in foam and spray, and
pouring seaward again to the accompaniment of many water sounds, we are
reminded always that this low tide area is of the sea and that we are
trespassers.

Here, in this mossy turf, life exists in layers, one above another; life
exists on other life, or within it, or under it, or above it. Because
the moss is low-growing and branches profusely and intricately, it
cushions the living things within it from the blows of the surf, and
holds the wetness of the sea about them in these brief intervals of the
low ebbing of the tide. After I have visited the shore and then at night
have heard the surf trampling in over these moss-grown ledges with the
heavy tread of the fall tides, I have wondered about the baby starfish,
the urchins, the brittle stars, the tube-dwelling amphipods, the
nudibranchs, and all the other small and delicate fauna of the moss; but
I know that if there is security in their world it should be here, in
this densest of intertidal jungles, over which the waves break
harmlessly.

The moss forms so dense a covering that one cannot see what is beneath
without intimate exploration. The abundance of life here, both in
species and individuals, is on a scale that is hard to grasp. There is
scarcely a stem of Irish moss that is not completely encased with one of
the bryozoan sea mats—the white lacework of Membranipora or the glassy,
brittle crust of Microporella. Such a crust consists of a mosaic of
almost microscopic cells or compartments, arranged in regular rows and
patterns, their surfaces finely sculptured. Each cell is the home of a
minute, tentacled creature. By a conservative guess, several thousand
such creatures live on a single stem of moss. On a square foot of rock
surface there are probably several hundred such stems, providing living
space for about a million of the bryozoans. On a stretch of Maine shore
that the eye can take in at a glance, the population must run into the
trillions for this single group of animals.

But there are further implications. If the population of the sea laces
is so immense, that of the creatures they feed upon must be infinitely
greater. A bryozoan colony acts as a highly efficient trap or filter to
remove minute food animals from the sea water. One by one, the doors of
the separate compartments open and from each a whorl of petal-like
filaments is thrust out. In one moment the whole surface of the colony
may be alive with crowns of tentacles swaying like flowers in a
wind-swept field; the next instant, all may have snapped back into their
protective cells and the colony is again a pavement of sculptured stone.
But while the “flowers” sway over the stone field each spells death for
many beings of the sea, as it draws in the minute spheres and ovals and
crescents of the protozoans and the smallest algae, perhaps also some of
the smallest of crustaceans and worms, or the larvae of mollusks and
starfish, all of which are invisibly present in this mossy jungle, in
numbers like the stars.

Larger animals are less numerous but still impressively abundant. Sea
urchins, looking like large green cockleburs, often lie deep within the
moss, their globular bodies anchored securely to the underlying rock by
the adhesive discs of many tube feet. The ubiquitous common periwinkles,
in some curious way unaffected by the conditions that confine most
intertidal animals to certain zones, live above, within, and below the
moss zone. Here their shells lie about over the surface of the weed at
low tide; they hang heavily from its fronds, ready to drop at a touch.

And young starfish are here by the hundred, for these meadows of moss
seem to be one of the chief nurseries for the starfish of northern
shores. In the fall almost every other plant shelters quarter-inch and
half-inch sizes. In these youthful starfish there are color patterns
that become obliterated in maturity. The tube feet, the spines, and all
the other curious epidermal outgrowths of these spiny-skinned creatures
are large in proportion to the total size and have a clean perfection of
form and structure.

On the rocky floor among the plant stems lie the infant stars. They are
white insubstantial specks, in size and delicate beauty like snowflakes.
There is an obvious newness about them, proclaiming that they have
undergone their metamorphosis from the larval form to the adult shape
only recently.

Perhaps it was on these very rocks that the swimming larvae, completing
their period of life in the plankton, came to rest, attaching themselves
firmly and becoming for a brief period sedentary animals. Then their
bodies were like blown glass from which slender horns projected; the
horns or lobes were covered with cilia for swimming and some of them
bore suckers for use when the larvae should seek the firm underlying
floor of the sea. During the short but critical period of attachment,
the larval tissues were reorganized as completely as those of a pupal
insect within a cocoon, the infant shape disappeared and in its place
the five-rayed body of the adult was formed. Now as we find them, these
new-made starfish use their tube feet competently, creeping over the
rocks, righting their bodies if by mischance they are overturned, even,
we may suppose, finding and devouring minute food animals in true
starfish fashion.

The northern starfish lives in almost every low tide pool or waits out
the tidal interval in wet moss or in the dripping coolness of a rock
overhang. On a very low tide, when the departure of the sea is brief,
these stars strew their variously hued forms over the moss like so many
blossoms—pink, blue, purple, peach, or beige. Here and there is a gray
or orange starfish on which the spines stand out conspicuously in a
pattern of white dots. Its arms are rounder and firmer than those of the
northern star and the round stony plate on its upper surface is usually
a bright orange instead of pale yellow as in the northern species. This
starfish is common south of Cape Cod and only a few individuals stray
farther north. Still a third species inhabits these low tide rocks—the
blood-red starfish, Henricia, whose kind not only lives at these margins
of the sea but goes down to lightless sea bottoms near the edge of the
continental shelf. It is always an inhabitant of cool waters and south
of Cape Cod must go offshore to find the temperatures it requires. But
its dispersal is not, as one might suppose, by the larval stages, for
unlike most other starfish it produces no swimming young; instead, the
mother holds the eggs and the young that develop from them in a pouch
formed by her arms as she assumes a humped position. Thus she broods
them until they have become fully developed little starfish.

The Jonah crabs use the resilient cushion of moss as a hiding place to
wait for the return of the tide or the coming of darkness. I remember a
moss-carpeted ledge standing out from a rock wall, jutting out over sea
depths where Laminaria rolled in the tide. The sea had only recently
dropped below this ledge; its return was imminent and in fact was
promised by every glassy swell that surged smoothly to its edge, then
fell away. The moss was saturated, holding the water as faithfully as a
sponge. Down within the deep pile of that carpet I caught a glimpse of a
bright rosy color. At first I took it to be a growth of one of the
encrusting corallines, but when I parted the fronds I was startled by
abrupt movement as a large crab shifted its position and lapsed again
into passive waiting. Only after search deep in the moss did I find
several of the crabs, waiting out the brief interval of low tide and
reasonably secure from detection by the gulls.

The seeming passivity of these northern crabs must be related to their
need to escape the gulls—probably their most persistent enemies. By day
one always has to search for the crabs. If not hidden deeply within the
seaweeds, they may be wedged in the farthest recess afforded by an
overhanging rock, secure there, in dim coolness, gently waving their
antennae and waiting for the return of the sea. In darkness, however,
the big crabs possess the shore. One night when the tide was ebbing I
went down to the low tide world to return a large starfish I had taken
on the morning tide. The starfish was at home at the lowest level of
these tides of the August moon, and to that level it must be returned. I
took a flashlight and made my way down over the slippery rockweeds. It
was an eerie world; ledges curtained with weed and boulders that by day
were familiar landmarks seemed to loom larger than I remembered and to
have assumed unfamiliar shapes, every projecting mass thrown into bold
relief by the shadows. Everywhere I looked, directly in the beam of my
flashlight or obliquely in the half-illuminated gloom, crabs were
scuttling about. Boldly and possessively they inhabited the
weed-shrouded rocks. All the grotesqueness of their form accentuated,
they seemed to have transformed this once familiar place into a goblin
world.

In some places, the moss is attached, not to the underlying rock, but to
the next lower layer of life, a community of horse mussels. These large
mollusks inhabit heavy, bulging shells, the smaller ends of which
bristle with coarse yellow hairs that grow as excrescences from the
epidermis. The horse mussels themselves are the basis of a whole
community of animals that would find life on these wave-swept rocks
impossible except for the presence and activities of the mollusks. The
mussels have bound their shells to the underlying rock by an almost
inextricable tangle of golden-hued byssus threads. These are the product
of glands in the long slender foot, the threads being “spun” from a
curious milky secretion that solidifies on contact with sea water. The
threads possess a texture that is a remarkable combination of toughness,
strength, softness, and elasticity; extending out in all directions they
enable the mussels to hold their position not only against the thrust of
incoming waves but also against the drag of the backwash, which in a
heavy surf is tremendous.

Over the years that the mussels have been growing here, particles of
muddy debris have settled under their shells and around the anchor lines
of the byssus threads. This has created still another area for life, a
sort of understory inhabited by a variety of animals including worms,
crustaceans, echinoderms, and numerous mollusks, as well as the baby
mussels of an oncoming generation—these as yet so small and transparent
that the forms of their infant bodies show through newly formed shells.

Certain animals almost invariably live among the horse mussels. Brittle
stars insinuate their thin bodies among the threads and under the shells
of the mussels, gliding with serpentine motions of the long slender
arms. The scale worms always live here, too, and down in the lower
layers of this strange community of animals starfish may live below the
scale worms and brittle stars, and sea urchins below the starfish, and
sea cucumbers below the urchins.

Of the echinoderms that live here, few are the largest individuals of
their species. The blanket of horse mussels seems to be a shelter for
young, growing animals, and indeed the full-grown starfish and urchins
could hardly be accommodated there. In the waterless intervals of the
low tide, the cucumbers draw themselves into little football-shaped
ovals scarcely more than an inch long; returned to the water and fully
relaxed, they extend their bodies to a length of five or six inches and
unfurl a crown of tentacles. The cucumbers are detritus feeders, and
explore the surrounding muddy debris with their soft tentacles, which
periodically they pull back and draw across their mouths, as a child
would lick his fingers.

In pockets deep in the moss under layers of mussels, a long, slender
little fish of the blenny tribe, the rock eel, waits for the return of
the tide, coiled in its water-filled refuge with several of its kind.
Disturbed by an intruder, all thrash the water violently, squirming with
eel-like undulations to escape.

Where the big mussels grow more sparsely, in the seaward suburbs of this
mussel city, the moss carpet, too, becomes a little thinner; but still
the underlying rock seldom is exposed. The green crumb-of-bread sponge,
which at higher levels seeks the shelter of rock overhangs and tide
pools, here seems able to face the direct force of the sea and forms
soft, thick mats of pale green, dotted with the cones and craters
typical of this species. And here and there patches of another color
show amid the thinning moss—dull rose or a gleaming, reddish-brown of
satin finish—an intimation of what lies at lower levels.

During much of the year the spring tides drop down into the band of
Irish moss but go no lower, returning then toward the land. But in
certain months, depending on the changing positions of sun and moon and
earth, even the spring tides gain in amplitude, and their surge of water
ebbs farther into the sea even as it rises higher against the land.
Always, the autumn tides move strongly, and as the hunter’s moon waxes
and grows round, there come days and nights when the flood tides leap at
the smooth rim of granite and send up their lace-edged wavelets to touch
the roots of the bayberry; on their ebbs, with sun and moon combining to
draw them back to the sea, they fall away from ledges not revealed since
the April moon shone upon their dark shapes. Then they expose the sea’s
enameled floor—the rose of encrusting corallines, the green of sea
urchins, the shining amber of the oarweeds.

At such a time of great tides I go down to that threshold of the sea
world to which land creatures are admitted rarely in the cycle of the
year. There I have known dark caves where tiny sea flowers bloom and
masses of soft coral endure the transient withdrawal of the water. In
these caves and in the wet gloom of deep crevices in the rocks I have
found myself in the world of the sea anemones—creatures that spread a
creamy-hued crown of tentacles above the shining brown columns of their
bodies, like handsome chrysanthemums blooming in little pools held in
depressions or on bottoms just below the tide line.

Where they are exposed by this extreme ebbing of the water, their
appearance is so changed that they seem not meant for even this brief
experience of land life. Wherever the contours of this uneven sea floor
provide some shelter I have found their exposed colonies—dozens or
scores of anemones crowded together, their translucent bodies touching,
side against side. The anemones that cling to horizontal surfaces
respond to the withdrawal of water by pulling all their tissues down
into a flattened, conical mass of firm consistency. The crown of
feather-soft tentacles is retracted and tucked within, with no
suggestion of the beauty that resides in an expanded anemone. Those that
grow on vertical rocks hang down limply, extended into curious,
hourglass shapes, all their tissues flaccid in the unaccustomed
withdrawal of water. They do not lack the ability to contract, for when
they are touched they promptly begin to shorten the column, drawing it
up into more normal proportions. These anemones, deserted by the sea,
are bizarre objects rather than things of beauty, and indeed bear only
the most remote resemblance to the anemones blooming under water just
offshore, all their tentacles expanded in the search for food. As small
water creatures come in contact with the tentacles of these expanded
anemones, they receive a deadly discharge. Each of the thousand or more
tentacles bears thousands of coiled darts embedded in its substance,
each with a minute spine protruding. The spine may act as a trigger to
set off the explosion, or perhaps the very nearness of prey acts as a
sort of chemical trigger, causing the dart to explode with great
violence, impaling or entangling its victim and injecting a poison.

Like the anemones, the soft coral hangs its thimble-sized colonies on
the under side of ledges. Limp and dripping at low tide, they suggest
nothing of the life and beauty to which the returning water restores
them. Then from all the myriad pores of the surface of the colony, the
tentacles of little tubular animals appear and the polyps thrust
themselves out into the tide, seizing each for itself the minute shrimps
and copepods and multiformed larvae brought by the water.

The soft coral, or sea finger, secretes no limy cups as the distantly
related stony, or reef, corals do, but forms colonies in which many
animals live embedded in a tough matrix strengthened with spicules of
lime. Minute though the spicules are, they become geologically important
where, in tropical reefs, the soft corals, or Alcyonaria, mingle with
the true corals. With the death and dissolution of the soft tissues, the
hard spicules become minute building stones, entering into the
composition of the reef. Alcyonarians grow in lush profusion and variety
on the coral reefs and flats of the Indian Ocean, for these soft corals
are predominantly creatures of the tropics. A few, however, venture into
polar waters. One very large species, tall as a tall man and branched
like a tree, lives on the fishing banks off Nova Scotia and New England.
Most of the group live in deep waters; for the most part the intertidal
rocks are inhospitable to them and only an occasional low-lying ledge,
rarely and briefly exposed on the low spring tides, bears their colonies
on dark and hidden surfaces.

In seams and crevices of rock, in little water-filled pools, or on rock
walls briefly exposed by the tide’s low ebbing, colonies of the
pink-hearted hydroid Tubularia form gardens of beauty. Where the water
still covers them the flowerlike animals sway gracefully at the ends of
long stalks, their tentacles reaching out to capture small animals of
the plankton. Perhaps it is where they are permanently submerged,
however, that they reach their fullest development. I have seen them
coating wharf pilings, floats, and submerged ropes and cables so thickly
that not a trace of the substratum could be seen, their growth giving
the illusion of thousands of blossoms, each as large as the tip of my
little finger.

Below the last clumps of Irish moss, a new kind of sea bottom is
exposed. The transition is abrupt. As though a line had been drawn,
suddenly there is no more moss, and one steps from the yielding brown
cushion onto a surface that seemingly is of stone. Except that the color
is wrong, the effect is almost that of a volcanic slope—there is the
same barren nakedness. Yet this is not rock that we see. The underlying
rock is coated on every surface, vertical or horizontal, exposed or
hidden, with a crust of coralline algae, so that it wears a rich
old-rose color. So intimate is the union that the plant seems part of
the rock. Here the periwinkles wear little patches of pink on their
shells, all the rock caverns and fissures are lined with the same color,
and the rock bottom that slants away into green water carries down the
rose hue as far as the eye can follow.

The coralline algae are plants of unusual fascination. They belong to
the group of red seaweeds, most of which live in the deeper coastal
waters, for the chemical nature of their pigments usually requires the
protection of a screen of water between their tissues and the sun. The
corallines, however, are extraordinary in their ability to withstand
direct sunlight. They are able to incorporate carbonate of lime into
their tissues so that they have become hardened. Most species form
encrusting patches on rocks, shells, and other firm surfaces. The crust
may be thin and smooth, suggesting a coat of enamel paint; or it may be
thick and roughened by small nodules and protuberances. In the tropics
the corallines often enter importantly into the composition of the coral
reefs, helping to cement the branching structures built by the coral
animals into a solid reef. Here and there in the East Indies they cover
the tidal flats as far as eye can see with their delicately hued crusts,
and many of the “coral reefs” of the Indian Ocean contain no coral but
are built largely of these plants. About the coasts of Spitsbergen,
where under the dimly lit waters of the north the great forests of the
brown algae grow, there are also vast calcareous banks, stretching mile
after mile, formed by the coralline algae. Being able to live not only
in tropical warmth but where water temperatures seldom rise above the
freezing point, these plants flourish all the way from Arctic to
Antarctic seas.

Where these same corallines paint a rose-colored band on the rocks of
the Maine coast, as though to mark the low water line of the lowest
spring tides, visible animal life is scarce. But although little else
lives openly in this zone, thousands of sea urchins do. Instead of
hiding in crevices or under rocks as they do at the higher levels, they
live fully exposed on the flat or gently shelving rock faces. Groups of
a score or half a hundred individuals lie together on the
coralline-coated rocks, forming patches of pure green on the rose
background. I have seen such herds of urchins lying on rocks that were
being washed by a heavy surf, but apparently all the little anchors
formed by their tube feet held securely. Though the waves broke heavily
and poured back in a turbulent rush of waters, there the urchins
remained undisturbed. Perhaps the strong tendency to hide and to wedge
themselves into crevices and under boulders, as displayed by urchins in
tide pools or up in the rockweed zone, is not so much an attempt to
avoid the power of the surf as a means of escaping the eager eyes of the
gulls, who hunt them relentlessly on every low tide. This coralline zone
where the urchins live so openly is covered almost constantly with a
protective layer of water; probably not more than a dozen daytime tides
in the entire year fall to this level. At all other times, the depth of
water over the urchins prevents the gulls from reaching them, for
although a gull can make shallow plunges under water, it cannot dive as
a tern does, and probably cannot reach a bottom deeper than the length
of its own body.

The lives of many of these creatures of the low tide rocks are bound
together by interlacing ties, in the relation of predator to prey, or in
the relation of species that compete for space or food. Over all these
the sea itself exercises a directing and regulating force.

The urchins seek sanctuary from the gulls at this low level of the
spring tides, but in themselves stand in the relation of dangerous
predators to other animals. Where they advance into the Irish moss zone,
hiding in deep crevices and sheltering under rock overhangs, they devour
numbers of periwinkles, and even attack barnacles and mussels. The
number of urchins at any particular level of shore has a strong
regulating effect on the populations of their prey. The starfish and a
voracious snail, the common whelk, like the urchins, have their centers
of population in deep water offshore and make predatory excursions of
varying duration into the intertidal zone.

The position of the prey animals—the mussels, barnacles, and
periwinkles—on sheltered shores has become difficult. They are hardy
and adaptable, able to live at any level of the tide. Yet on such shores
the rockweeds have crowded them out of the upper two-thirds of the
shore, except for scattered individuals. At and just below the low tide
line are the hungry predators, so all that remains for these animals is
the level near the low-water line of the neap tides. On protected coasts
it is here that the barnacles and mussels assemble in their millions to
spread their cover of white and blue over the rocks, and the legions of
the common periwinkle gather.

But the sea, with its tempering and modifying effect, can alter the
pattern. Whelks, starfish, and urchins are creatures of cold water.
Where the offshore waters are cold and deep and the tidal flow is drawn
from these icy reservoirs, the predators can range up into the
intertidal zone, decimating the numbers of their prey. But when there is
a layer of warm surface water the predators are confined to the cold
deep levels. As they retreat seaward, the legions of their prey follow
down in their wake, descending as far as they may into the world of the
low spring tides.

Tide pools contain mysterious worlds within their depths, where all the
beauty of the sea is subtly suggested and portrayed in miniature. Some
of the pools occupy deep crevices or fissures; at their seaward ends
these crevices disappear under water, but toward the land they run back
slantingly into the cliffs and their walls rise higher, casting deep
shadows over the water within them. Other pools are contained in rocky
basins with a high rim on the seaward side to hold back the water when
the last of the ebb drains away. Seaweeds line their walls. Sponges,
hydroids, anemones, sea slugs, mussels, and starfish live in water that
is calm for hours at a time, while just beyond the protecting rim the
surf may be pounding.

The pools have many moods. At night they hold the stars and reflect the
light of the Milky Way as it flows across the sky above them. Other,
living stars come in from the sea: the shining emeralds of tiny
phosphorescent diatoms—the glowing eyes of small fishes that swim at
the surface of the dark water, their bodies slender as matchsticks,
moving almost upright with little snouts uplifted—the elusive moonbeam
flashes of comb jellies that have come in with a rising tide. Fishes and
comb jellies hunt the black recesses of the rock basins, but like the
tides they come and go, having no part in the permanent life of the
pools.

By day there are other moods. Some of the most beautiful pools lie high
on the shore. Their beauty is the beauty of simple elements—color and
form and reflection. I know one that is only a few inches deep, yet it
holds all the depth of the sky within it, capturing and confining the
reflected blue of far distances. The pool is outlined by a band of
bright green, a growth of one of the seaweeds called Enteromorpha. The
fronds of the weed are shaped like simple tubes or straws. On the land
side a wall of gray rock rises above the surface to the height of a man,
and reflected, descends its own depth into the water. Beyond and below
the reflected cliff are those far reaches of the sky. When the light and
one’s mood are right, one can look down into the blue so far that one
would hesitate to set foot in so bottomless a pool. Clouds drift across
it and wind ripples scud over its surface, but little else moves there,
and the pool belongs to the rock and the plants and the sky.

In another high pool nearby, the green tube-weed rises from all of the
floor. By some magic the pool transcends its realities of rock and water
and plants, and out of these elements creates the illusion of another
world. Looking into the pool, one sees no water but instead a pleasant
landscape of hills and valleys with scattered forests. Yet the illusion
is not so much that of an actual landscape as of a painting of one; like
the strokes of a skillful artist’s brush, the individual fronds of the
algae do not literally portray trees, they merely suggest them. But the
artistry of the pool, as of the painter, creates the image and the
impression.

Little or no animal life is visible in any of these high pools—perhaps
a few periwinkles and a scattering of little amber isopods. Conditions
are difficult in all pools high on the shore because of the prolonged
absence of the sea. The temperature of the water may rise many degrees,
reflecting the heat of the day. The water freshens under heavy rains or
becomes more salty under a hot sun. It varies between acid and alkaline
in a short time through the chemical activity of the plants. Lower on
the shore the pools provide far more stable conditions, and both plants
and animals are able to live at higher levels than they could on open
rock. The tide pools, then, have the effect of moving the life zones a
little higher on the shore. Yet they, too, are affected by the duration
of the sea’s absence, and the inhabitants of a high pool are very
different from those of a low-level pool that is separated from the sea
only at long intervals and then briefly.

The highest of the pools scarcely belong to the sea at all; they hold
the rains and receive only an occasional influx of sea water from storm
surf or very high tides. But the gulls fly up from their hunting at the
sea’s edge, bringing a sea urchin or a crab or a mussel to drop on the
rocks, in this way shattering the hard shelly covering and exposing the
soft parts within. Bits of urchin tests or crab claws or mussel shells
find their way into the pools, and as they disintegrate their limy
substance enters into the chemistry of the water, which then becomes
alkaline. A little one-celled plant called Sphaerella finds this a
favorable climate for growth—a minute, globular bit of life almost
invisible as an individual, but in its millions turning the waters of
these high pools red as blood. Apparently the alkalinity is a necessary
condition; other pools, outwardly similar except for the chance
circumstance that they contain no shells, have none of the tiny crimson
balls.

Even the smallest pools, filling depressions no larger than a teacup,
have some life. Often it is a thin patch of scores of the little
seashore insect, _Anurida maritima_—“the wingless one who goes to sea.”
These small insects run on the surface film when the water is
undisturbed, crossing easily from one shore of a pool to another. Even
the slightest rippling causes them to drift helplessly, however, so that
scores or hundreds of them come together by chance, becoming conspicuous
only as they form thin, leaflike patches on the water. A single Anurida
is small as a gnat. Under a lens, it seems to be clothed in blue-gray
velvet through which many bristles or hairs protrude. The bristles hold
a film of air about the body of the insect when it enters the water, and
so it need not return to the upper shore when the tide rises. Wrapped in
its glistening air blanket, dry and provided with air for breathing, it
waits in cracks and crevices until the tide ebbs again. Then it emerges
to roam over the rocks, searching for the bodies of fish and crabs and
the dead mollusks and barnacles that provide its food, for it is one of
the scavengers that play a part in the economy of the sea, keeping the
organic materials in circulation.

And often I find the pools of the upper third of the shore lined with a
brown velvety coating. My fingers, exploring, are able to peel it off
the rocks in thin smooth-surfaced sheets like parchment. It is one of
the brown seaweeds called Ralfsia; it appears on the rocks in small,
lichen-like growths or, as here, spreading its thin crust over extensive
areas. Wherever it grows its presence changes the nature of a pool, for
it provides the shelter that many small creatures seek so urgently.
Those small enough to creep in under it—to inhabit the dark pockets of
space between the encrusting weed and the rock—have found security
against being washed away by the surf. Looking at these pools with their
velvet lining, one would say there is little life here—only a
sprinkling of periwinkles browsing, their shells rocking gently as they
scrape at the surface of the brown crust, or perhaps a few barnacles
with their cones protruding through the sheet of plant tissue, opening
their doors to sweep the water for food. But whenever I have brought a
sample of this brown seaweed to my microscope, I have found it teeming
with life. Always there have been many cylindrical tubes, needle-fine,
built of a muddy substance. The architect of each is a small worm whose
body is formed of a series of eleven infinitely small rings or segments,
like eleven counters in a game of checkers, piled one above another.
From its head arises a structure that makes this otherwise drab worm
beautiful—a fanlike crown or plume composed of the finest feathery
filaments. The filaments absorb oxygen and also serve to ensnare small
food organisms when thrust out of the tube. And always, among this
micro-fauna of the Ralfsia crust, there have been little fork-tailed
crustaceans with glittering eyes the color of rubies. Other crustaceans
called ostracods are enclosed in flattened, peach-colored shells
fashioned of two parts, like a box with its lid; from the shell long
appendages may be thrust out to row the creatures through the water. But
most numerous of all are the minute worms hurrying across the
crust—segmented bristle worms of many species and smooth-bodied,
serpent-like ribbon worms or nemerteans, their appearance and rapid
movements betraying their predatory errands.

A pool need not be large to hold beauty within pellucid depths. I
remember one that occupied the shallowest of depressions; as I lay
outstretched on the rocks beside it I could easily touch its far shore.
This miniature pool was about midway between the tide lines, and for all
I could see it was inhabited by only two kinds of life. Its floor was
paved with mussels. Their shells were a soft color, the misty blue of
distant mountain ranges, and their presence lent an illusion of depth.
The water in which they lived was so clear as to be invisible to my
eyes; I could detect the interface between air and water only by the
sense of coldness on my fingertips. The crystal water was filled with
sunshine—an infusion and distillation of light that reached down and
surrounded each of these small but resplendent shellfish with its
glowing radiance.

The mussels provided a place of attachment for the only other visible
life of the pool. Fine as the finest threads, the basal stems of
colonies of hydroids traced their almost invisible lines across the
mussel shells. The hydroids belonged to the group called Sertularia, in
which each individual of the colony and all the supporting and
connecting branches are enclosed within transparent sheaths, like a tree
in winter wearing a sheath of ice. From the basal stems erect branches
arose, each branch the bearer of a double row of crystal cups within
which the tiny beings of the colony dwelt. The whole was the very
embodiment of beauty and fragility, and as I lay beside the pool and my
lens brought the hydroids into clearer view they seemed to me to look
like nothing so much as the finest cut glass—perhaps the individual
segments of an intricately wrought chandelier. Each animal in its
protective cup was something like a very small sea anemone—a little
tubular being surmounted by a crown of tentacles. The central cavity of
each communicated with a cavity that ran the length of the branch that
bore it, and this in turn with the cavities of larger branches and with
those of the main stem, so that the feeding activities of each animal
contributed to the nourishment of the whole colony.

On what, I wondered, were these Sertularians feeding? From their very
abundance I knew that whatever creatures served them as food must be
infinitely more numerous than the carnivorous hydroids themselves. Yet I
could see nothing. Obviously their food would be minute, for each of the
feeders was of threadlike diameter and its tentacles were like the
finest gossamer. Somewhere in the crystal clarity of the pool my eye—or
so it seemed—could detect a fine mist of infinitely small particles,
like dust motes in a ray of sunshine. Then as I looked more closely the
motes had disappeared and there seemed to be once more only that perfect
clarity, and the sense that there had been an optical illusion. Yet I
knew it was only the human imperfection of my vision that prevented me
from seeing those microscopic hordes that were the prey of the groping,
searching tentacles I could barely see. Even more than the visible life,
that which was unseen came to dominate my thoughts, and finally the
invisible throng seemed to me the most powerful beings in the pool. Both
the hydroids and the mussels were utterly dependent on this invisible
flotsam of the tide streams, the mussels as passive strainers of the
plant plankton, the hydroids as active predators seizing and ensnaring
the minute water fleas and copepods and worms. But should the plankton
become less abundant, should the incoming tide streams somehow become
drained of this life, then the pool would become a pool of death, both
for the mussels in their shells blue as mountains and for the crystal
colonies of the hydroids.

Some of the most beautiful pools of the shore are not exposed to the
view of the casual passer-by. They must be searched for—perhaps in
low-lying basins hidden by great rocks that seem to be heaped in
disorder and confusion, perhaps in darkened recesses under a projecting
ledge, perhaps behind a thick curtain of concealing weeds.

I know such a hidden pool. It lies in a sea cave, at low tide filling
perhaps the lower third of its chamber. As the flooding tide returns the
pool grows, swelling in volume until all the cave is water-filled and
the cave and the rocks that form and contain it are drowned beneath the
fullness of the tide. When the tide is low, however, the cave may be
approached from the landward side. Massive rocks form its floor and
walls and roof. They are penetrated by only a few openings—two near the
floor on the sea side and one high on the landward wall. Here one may
lie on the rocky threshold and peer through the low entrance into the
cave and down into its pool. The cave is not really dark; indeed on a
bright day it glows with a cool green light. The source of this soft
radiance is the sunlight that enters through the openings low on the
floor of the pool, but only after its entrance into the pool does the
light itself become transformed, invested with a living color of purest,
palest green that is borrowed from the covering of sponge on the floor
of the cave.

Through the same openings that admit the light, fish come in from the
sea, explore the green hall, and depart again into the vaster waters
beyond. Through those low portals the tides ebb and flow. Invisibly,
they bring in minerals—the raw materials for the living chemistry of
the plants and animals of the cave. They bring, invisibly again, the
larvae of many sea creatures—drifting, drifting in their search for a
resting place. Some may remain and settle here; others will go out on
the next tide.

Looking down into the small world confined within the walls of the cave,
one feels the rhythms of the greater sea world beyond. The waters of the
pool are never still. Their level changes not only gradually with the
rise and fall of the tide, but also abruptly with the pulse of the surf.
As the backwash of a wave draws it seaward, the water falls away
rapidly; then with a sudden reversal the inrushing water foams and
surges upward almost to one’s face.

On the outward movement one can look down and see the floor, its details
revealed more clearly in the shallowing water. The green crumb-of-bread
sponge covers much of the bottom of the pool, forming a thick-piled
carpet built of tough little feltlike fibers laced together with glassy,
double-pointed needles of silica—the spicules or skeletal supports of
the sponge. The green color of the carpet is the pure color of
chlorophyll, this plant pigment being confined within the cells of an
alga that are scattered through the tissues of the animal host. The
sponge clings closely to the rock, by the very smoothness and flatness
of its growth testifying to the streamlining force of heavy surf. In
quiet waters the same species sends up many projecting cones; here these
would give the turbulent waters a surface to grip and tear.

Interrupting the green carpet are patches of other colors, one a deep,
mustard yellow, probably a growth of the sulphur sponge. In the fleeting
moment when most of the water has drained away, one has glimpses of a
rich orchid color in the deepest part of the cave—the color of the
encrusting coralline algae.

Sponges and corallines together form a background for the larger tide
pool animals. In the quiet of ebb tide there is little or no visible
movement even among the predatory starfish that cling to the walls like
ornamental fixtures painted orange or rose or purple. A group of large
anemones lives on the wall of the cave, their apricot color vivid
against the green sponge. Today all the anemones may be attached on the
north wall of the pool, seemingly immobile and immovable; on the next
spring tides when I visit the pool again some of them may have shifted
over to the west wall and there taken up their station, again seemingly
immovable.

There is abundant promise that the anemone colony is a thriving one and
will be maintained. On the walls and ceiling of the cave are scores of
baby anemones—little glistening mounds of soft tissue, a pale,
translucent brown. But the real nursery of the colony seems to be in a
sort of antechamber opening into the central cave. There a roughly
cylindrical space no more than a foot across is enclosed by high
perpendicular rock walls to which hundreds of baby anemones cling.

On the roof of the cave is written a starkly simple statement of the
force of the surf. Waves entering a confined space always concentrate
all their tremendous force for a driving, upward leap; in this manner
the roofs of caves are gradually battered away. The open portal in which
I lie saves the ceiling of this cave from receiving the full force of
such upward-leaping waves; nevertheless, the creatures that live there
are exclusively a heavy-surf fauna. It is a simple black and white
mosaic—the black of mussel shells, on which the white cones of
barnacles are growing. For some reason the barnacles, skilled colonizers
of surf-swept rocks though they be, seem to have been unable to get a
foothold directly on the roof of the cave. Yet the mussels have done so.
I do not know how this happened but I can guess. I can imagine the young
mussels creeping in over the damp rock while the tide is out, spinning
their silk threads that bind them securely, anchoring them against the
returning waters. And then in time, perhaps, the growing colony of
mussels gave the infant barnacles a foothold more tenable than the
smooth rock, so that they were able to cement themselves to the mussel
shells. However it came about, that is the way we find them now.

As I lie and look into the pool there are moments of relative quiet, in
the intervals when one wave has receded and the next has not yet
entered. Then I can hear the small sounds: the sound of water dripping
from the mussels on the ceiling or of water dripping from seaweeds that
line the walls—small, silver splashes losing themselves in the vastness
of the pool and in the confused, murmurous whisperings that emanate from
the pool itself—the pool that is never quite still.

Then as my fingers explore among the dark red thongs of the dulse and
push away the fronds of the Irish moss that cover the walls beneath me,
I begin to find creatures of such extreme delicacy that I wonder how
they can exist in this cave when the brute force of storm surf is
unleashed within its confined space.

Adhering to the rock walls are thin crusts of one of the bryozoans, a
form in which hundreds of minute, flask-shaped cells of a brittle
structure, fragile as glass, lie one against another in regular rows to
form a continuous crust. The color is a pale apricot; the whole seems an
ephemeral creation that would crumble away at a touch, as hoarfrost
before the sun.

A tiny spiderlike creature with long and slender legs runs about over
the crust. For some reason that may have to do with its food, it is the
same apricot color as the bryozoan carpet beneath it; the sea spider,
too, seems the embodiment of fragility.

Another bryozoan of coarser, upright growth, Flustrella, sends up little
club-shaped projections from a basal mat. Again, the lime-impregnated
clubs seem brittle and glassy. Over and among them, innumerable little
roundworms crawl with serpentine motion, slender as threads. Baby
mussels creep in their tentative exploration of a world so new to them
they have not yet found a place to anchor themselves by slender silken
lines.

Exploring with my lens, I find many very small snails in the fronds of
seaweed. One of them has obviously not been long in the world, for its
pure white shell has formed only the first turn of the spiral that will
turn many times upon itself in growth from infancy to maturity. Another,
no larger, is nevertheless older. Its shining amber shell is coiled like
a French horn and, as I watch, the tiny creature within thrusts out a
bovine head and seems to be regarding its surroundings with two black
eyes, small as the smallest pinpoints.

But seemingly most fragile of all are the little calcareous sponges that
here and there exist among the seaweeds. They form masses of minute,
upthrust tubes of vase-like form, none more than half an inch high. The
wall of each is a mesh of fine threads—a web of starched lace made to
fairy scale.

I could have crushed any of these fragile structures between my
fingers—yet somehow they find it possible to exist here, amid the
surging thunder of the surf that must fill this cave as the sea comes
in. Perhaps the seaweeds are the key to the mystery, their resilient
fronds a sufficient cushion for all the minute and delicate beings they
contain.

But it is the sponges that give to the cave and its pool their special
quality—the sense of a continuing flow of time. For each day that I
visit the pool on the lowest tides of the summer they seem
unchanged—the same in July, the same in August, the same in September.
And they are the same this year as last, and presumably as they will be
a hundred or a thousand summers hence.

Simple in structure, little different from the first sponges that spread
their mats on ancient rocks and drew their food from a primordial sea,
the sponges bridge the eons of time. The green sponge that carpets the
floor of this cave grew in other pools before this shore was formed; it
was old when the first creatures came out of the sea in those ancient
eras of the Paleozoic, 300 million years ago; it existed even in the dim
past before the first fossil record, for the hard little spicules—all
that remains when the living tissue is gone—are found in the first
fossil-bearing rocks, those of the Cambrian period.

So, in the hidden chamber of that pool, time echoes down the long ages
to a present that is but a moment.

As I watched, a fish swam in, a shadow in the green light, entering the
pool by one of the openings low on its seaward wall. Compared with the
ancient sponges, the fish was almost a symbol of modernity, its fishlike
ancestry traceable only half as far into the past. And I, in whose eyes
the images of the two were beheld as though they were contemporaries,
was a mere newcomer whose ancestors had inhabited the earth so briefly
that my presence was almost anachronistic.

As I lay at the threshold of the cave thinking those thoughts, the surge
of waters rose and flooded across the rock on which I rested. The tide
was rising.




                            The Rim of Sand


ON THE SANDS of the sea’s edge, especially where they are broad and
bordered by unbroken lines of wind-built dunes, there is a sense of
antiquity that is missing from the young rock coast of New England. It
is in part a sense of the unhurried deliberation of earth processes that
move with infinite leisure, with all eternity at their disposal. For
unlike that sudden coming in of the sea to flood the valleys and surge
against the mountain crests of the drowned lands of New England, the sea
and the land lie here in a relation established gradually, over millions
of years.

During those long ages of geologic time, the sea has ebbed and flowed
over the great Atlantic coastal plain. It has crept toward the distant
Appalachians, paused for a time, then slowly receded, sometimes far into
its basin; and on each such advance it has rained down its sediments and
left the fossils of its creatures over that vast and level plain. And so
the particular place of its stand today is of little moment in the
history of the earth or in the nature of the beach—a hundred feet
higher, or a hundred feet lower, the seas would still rise and fall
unhurried over shining flats of sand, as they do today.

And the materials of the beach are themselves steeped in antiquity. Sand
is a substance that is beautiful, mysterious, and infinitely variable;
each grain on a beach is the result of processes that go back into the
shadowy beginnings of life, or of the earth itself.

The bulk of seashore sand is derived from the weathering and decay of
rocks, transported from their place of origin to the sea by the rains
and the rivers. In the unhurried processes of erosion, in the freighting
seaward, in the interruptions and resumptions of that journey, the
minerals have suffered various fates—some have been dropped, some have
worn out and vanished. In the mountains the slow decay and
disintegration of the rocks proceed, and the stream of sediments
grows—suddenly and dramatically by rockslides—slowly, inexorably, by
the wearing of rock by water. All begin their passage toward the sea.
Some disappear through the solvent action of water or by grinding
attrition in the rapids of a river’s bed. Some are dropped on the
riverbank by flood waters, there to lie for a hundred, a thousand years,
to become locked in the sediments of the plain and wait another million
years or so, during which, perhaps, the sea comes in and then returns to
its basin. Then at last they are released by the persistent work of
erosion’s tools—wind, rain, and frost—to resume the journey to the
sea. Once brought to salt water, a fresh rearranging, sorting, and
transport begin. Light minerals, like flakes of mica, are carried away
almost at once; heavy ones like the black sands of ilmenite and rutile
are picked up by the violence of storm waves and thrown on the upper
beach.

No individual sand grain remains long in any one place. The smaller it
is, the more it is subject to long transport—the larger grains by
water, the smaller by wind. An average grain of sand is only two and one
half times the weight of an equal volume of water, but more than two
thousand times as heavy as air, so only the smaller grains are available
for transport by wind. But despite the constant working over of the
sands by wind and water, a beach shows little visible change from day to
day, for as one grain is carried away, another is usually brought to
take its place.

The greater part of most beach sand consists of quartz, the most
abundant of all minerals, found in almost every type of rock. But many
other minerals occur among its crystal grains, and one small sample of
sand might contain fragments of a dozen or more. Through the sorting
action of wind, water, and gravity, fragments of darker, heavier
minerals may form patches overlying the pale quartz. So there may be a
curious purple shading over the sand, shifting with the wind, piling up
in little ridges of deeper color like the ripple marks of waves—a
concentration of almost pure garnet. Or there may be patches of dark
green—sands formed of glauconite, a product of the sea’s chemistry and
the interaction of the living and the non-living. Glauconite is a form
of iron silicate that contains potassium; it has occurred in the
deposits of all geologic ages. According to one theory, it is forming
now in warm shallow areas of the sea’s floor, where the shells of minute
creatures called foraminifera are accumulating and disintegrating on
muddy sea bottoms. On many Hawaiian beaches, the somber darkness of the
earth’s interior is reflected in sand grains of olivine derived from
black basaltic lavas. And drifts of the “black sands” of rutile and
ilmenite and other heavy minerals darken the beaches of Georgia’s St.
Simons and Sapelo Islands, clearly separated from the lighter quartz.

In some parts of the world the sands represent the remains of plants
that in life had lime-hardened tissues, or fragments of the calcareous
shells of sea creatures. Here and there on the coast of Scotland, for
example, are beaches composed of glistening white “nullipore sands”—the
shattered and sea-ground remains of coralline algae growing on the
bottom offshore. On the coast of Galway in Ireland the dunes are built
of sands composed of tiny perforated globes of calcium carbonate—the
shells of foraminifera that once floated in the sea. The animals were
mortal but the shells they built have endured. They drifted to the floor
of the sea and became compacted into sediment. Later the sediments were
uplifted to form cliffs, which were eroded and returned once more to the
sea. The shells of foraminifera appear also in the sands of southern
Florida and the Keys, along with coral debris and the shells of
mollusks, shattered, ground, and polished by the waves.

From Eastport to Key West, the sands of the American Atlantic coast, by
their changing nature, reveal a varied origin. Toward the northern part
of the coast mineral sands predominate, for the waves are still sorting
and rearranging and carrying from place to place the fragments of rock
that the glaciers brought down from the north, thousands of years ago.
Every grain of sand on a New England beach has a long and eventful
history. Before it was sand, it was rock—splintered by the chisels of
the frost, crushed under advancing glaciers and carried forward with the
ice in its slow advance, then ground and polished in the mill of the
surf. And long ages before the advance of the ice, some of the rock had
come up into the light of the sun from the black interior of the earth
by ways unseen and for the most part unknown, made fluid by subterranean
fires and rising along deep pipes and fissures. Now in this particular
moment of its history, it belongs to the sea’s edge—swept up and down
the beaches with the tides or drifted alongshore with the currents,
continuously sifted and sorted, packed down, washed out, or set adrift
again, as always and endlessly the waves work over the sands.

On Long Island, where much glacial material has accumulated, the sands
contain quantities of pink and red garnet and black tourmaline, along
with many grains of magnetite. In New Jersey, where the coastal plain
deposits of the south first appear, there is less magnetic material and
less garnet. Smoky quartz predominates at Barnegat, glauconite at
Monmouth Beach, and heavy minerals at Cape May. Here and there beryl
occurs where molten magma has brought up deeply buried material of the
ancient earth to crystallize near the surface.

North of Virginia, less than half of one per cent of the sands are of
calcium carbonate; southward, about 5 per cent. In North Carolina the
abundance of calcareous or shell sand suddenly increases, although
quartz sand still forms the bulk of the beach materials. Between Capes
Hatteras and Lookout as much as 10 per cent of the beach sand is
calcareous. And in North Carolina also there are odd local accumulations
of special materials such as silicified wood—the same substance that is
contained in the famous “singing sands” of the Island of Eigg in the
Hebrides.

The mineral sands of Florida are not of local origin but have been
derived from the weathering of rocks in the Piedmont and Appalachian
highlands of Georgia and South Carolina. The fragments are carried to
the sea on southward-moving streams and rivers. Beaches of the northern
part of Florida’s Gulf Coast are almost pure quartz, composed of crystal
grains that have descended from the mountains to sea level, accumulating
there in plains of snowlike whiteness. About Venice there is a special
sparkle and glitter over the sands, where crystals of the mineral zircon
are dusted over its surface like diamonds; and here and there is a
sprinkling of the blue, glasslike grains of cyanite. On the east coast
of Florida, quartz sands predominate for much of the long coast line (it
is the hard-packing quartz grains that compose the famous beaches of
Daytona) but toward the south, the crystal sands are mingled more and
more with fragments of shells. Near Miami the beach sands are less than
half quartz; about Cape Sable and in the Keys the sand is almost
entirely derived from coral and shell and the remains of foraminifera.
And all along the east coast of Florida, the beaches receive small
contributions of volcanic matter, as bits of floating pumice that have
drifted for thousands of miles in ocean currents are stranded on the
shore to become sand.

Infinitely small though it is, something of its history may be revealed
in the shape and texture of a grain of sand. Wind-transported sands tend
to be better rounded than water-borne; furthermore, their surface shows
a frosted effect from the abrasion of other grains carried in the blast
of air. The same effect is seen on panes of glass near the sea, or on
old bottles in the beach flotsam. Ancient sand grains, by their surface
etchings, may give a clue to the climate of past ages. In European
deposits of Pleistocene sand, the grains have frosted surfaces etched by
the great winds blowing off the glaciers of the Ice Age.

We think of rock as a symbol of durability, yet even the hardest rock
shatters and wears away when attacked by rain, frost or surf. But a
grain of sand is almost indestructible. It is the ultimate product of
the work of the waves—the minute, hard core of mineral that remains
after years of grinding and polishing. The tiny grains of wet sand lie
with little space between them, each holding a film of water about
itself by capillary attraction. Because of this cushioning liquid film,
there is little further wearing by attrition. Even the blows of heavy
surf cannot cause one sand grain to rub against another.

In the intertidal zone, this minuscule world of the sand grains is also
the world of inconceivably minute beings, which swim through the liquid
film around a grain of sand as fish would swim through the ocean
covering the sphere of the earth. Among this fauna and flora of the
capillary water are single-celled animals and plants, water mites,
shrimplike crustacea, insects, and the larvae of certain infinitely
small worms—all living, dying, swimming, feeding, breathing,
reproducing in a world so small that our human senses cannot grasp its
scale, a world in which the micro-droplet of water separating one grain
of sand from another is like a vast, dark sea.

Not all sands are inhabited by this “interstitial fauna.” Those derived
from the weathering of crystalline rocks are most abundantly populated.
Shell or coral sand seldom if ever contains copepods and other
microscopic life; perhaps this indicates that the grains of calcium
carbonate create unfavorably alkaline conditions in the water around
them.

On any beach the sum of all the little pools amid the sand grains
represents the amount of water available to the animals of the sands
during the low tide interval. Sand of average fineness is able to
contain almost its own volume of water, and so at low tide only the
topmost layers dry out under a warm sun. Below it is damp and cool, for
the contained water keeps the temperatures of the deeper sand
practically constant. Even the salinity is fairly stable; only the most
superficial layers are affected by rain falling on the beach or by
streams of fresh water coursing across it.

Bearing on its surface only the wave-carved ripple marks, the fine
traceries of sand grains dropped at last by the spent waves, and the
scattered shells of long-dead mollusks, the beach has a lifeless look,
as though not only uninhabited but indeed uninhabitable. In the sands
almost all is hidden. The only clues to the inhabitants of most beaches
are found in winding tracks, in slight movements disturbing the upper
layers, or in barely protruding tubes and all but concealed openings
leading down to hidden burrows.

The signs of living creatures are often visible, if not the animals
themselves, in deep gullies that cut the beaches, parallel to the shore
line, and hold at least a few inches of water from the fall of one tide
until the return of the next. A little moving hill of sand may yield a
moon snail intent on predatory errand. A V-shaped track may indicate the
presence of a burrowing clam, a sea mouse, a heart urchin. A flat
ribbonlike track may lead to a buried sand dollar or a starfish. And
wherever protected flats of sand or sandy mud lie exposed between the
tides, they are apt to be riddled with hundreds of holes, marked by the
sign of the ghost shrimps within. Other flats may bristle with forests
of protruding tubes, pencil thin and decorated weirdly with bits of
shell or seaweed, an indication that legions of the plumed worm,
Diopatra, live below. Or again there may be a wide area marked by the
black conical mounds of the lugworm. Or here at the edge of the tide a
chain of little parchment capsules, one end free and the other
disappearing under the sand, shows that one of the large predatory
whelks lies below, busy with the prolonged task of laying and protecting
her eggs.

But almost always the essence of the lives—the finding of food, the
hiding from enemies, the capturing of prey, the producing of young, all
that makes up the living and dying and perpetuating of this sand-beach
fauna—is concealed from the eyes of those who merely glance at the
surface of the sands and declare them barren.

I remember a chill December morning on one of Florida’s Ten Thousand
Islands, with the sands wet from a recently fallen tide and the fresh,
clean wind blowing handfuls of spindrift along the beach. For several
hundred yards, where the shore ran in a long curve from the Gulf toward
the shelter of the bay, there were peculiar markings on the dark wet
sand just above the water’s edge. The marks were arranged in groups, in
each of which a series of thin spidery lines radiated out from a central
spot, as though unsteadily traced there by a slender stick. At first no
sign of any living animal was to be seen—nothing to tell what creature
had made these seemingly careless scribblings. After kneeling on the wet
sand and looking at one after another of these strange insignia, I found
that under each of the central spots lay the flat pentagonal disc of a
serpent starfish. The marks on the sand were made by its long and
slender arms, inscribing the record of its forward progress.

And then I remember wading on a June day over Bird Shoal, which lies off
the town of Beaufort in North Carolina, where at low tide acres of sand
bottom are covered only by a few inches of water. Near the shore I found
two sharply defined grooves in the sand; my index finger could have
measured their span. Between the grooves was a faint, irregular line.
Step by step, I was led out across the flat by the tracks; finally, at
the temporary end of the trail, I came upon a young horseshoe crab,
heading seaward.

For most of the fauna of the sand beaches, the key to survival is to
burrow into the wet sand, and to possess means of feeding, breathing and
reproducing while lying below reach of the surf. And so the story of the
sand is in part the story of small lives lived deep within it, finding
in its dark, damp coolness a retreat from fish that come hunting with
the tide and from birds that forage at the water’s edge when the tide
has fallen. Once below the surface layers, the borrower has found not
only stable conditions but also a refuge where few enemies threaten.
Those few are likely to reach down from above—perhaps a bird thrusting
a long bill into the hole of a fiddler crab—a sting ray flapping along
the bottom, plowing up the sand for buried mollusks—an octopus sliding
an exploring tentacle down into a hole. Only an occasional enemy comes
through the sand. The moon snail is a predator that makes a successful
living in this difficult way. It is a blind creature with no use for
eyes because it is forever groping through dark sands, hunting mollusks
that live as much as a foot below the surface. Its smoothly rounded
shell eases its descent into the sand as it digs with the immense foot.
On locating prey, it holds the animal with the foot and drills a round
hole in the shell. The moon snails are voracious; young animals eat more
than a third of their weight in clams each week. Some worms also are
predatory burrowers; so are a few starfish. But for most predators,
continuous burrowing consumes more energy than would be supplied by the
prey thus found. Most of the burrowers in sand are passive feeders,
digging only enough to establish a temporary or permanent home in which
to lie while straining food from the water or sucking up detritus that
accumulates on the sea bottom.

The rising tide sets in action a system of living filters through which
prodigious quantities of water are strained. Buried mollusks push up
their siphons through the sand to draw the incoming water through their
bodies. Worms lying in U-shaped parchment tubes begin to pump, drawing
the water in through one end of the tube, expelling it through the
other. The incoming stream brings food and oxygen; the outgoing has been
depleted of much of the food and bears away the organic wastes of the
worm. Small crabs spread the feathery nets of their antennae like
cast-nets to bring in food.

With the tide, predators come from offshore. A blue crab dashes out of
the surf to seize a fat mole crab that is in the act of spreading its
antennae to filter the backwash of a receding wave. Clouds of salt-water
minnows move in with the tide, searching for the small amphipods of the
upper beach. Launce, or sand eels, dart through the shallow water
seeking copepods or fish fry; sometimes the launce are pursued by the
shadowy forms of larger fish.

As the tide falls much of this extraordinary activity slackens. There is
less eating and being eaten. In the wet sands, however, some animals can
continue to eat even after the tide has receded. Lugworms can continue
their work of passing sand through their bodies for the sake of the
scraps of nutriment they contain. Heart urchins and sand dollars, lying
in saturated sand, continue to sort out bits of food. But over most of
the sands there is a lull of repletion—of waiting for the turn of the
tide.

Although there are many places where, on quieter shores and protected
shoals, such richness of life may be found, certain ones live most
clearly in my memories. On one of the sea islands of Georgia is a great
beach that is visited only by the most gentle surf, although it looks
straight across to Africa. Storms usually pass it by, for it lies well
inside the long, incurving arc of coast that swings between the Capes of
Fear and Canaveral, and the prevailing winds are such that no heavy
swells roll in upon it. The texture of the beach itself is unusually
firm because of a mixture of mud and clay with the sand; permanent holes
and burrows can be dug in it, and the streaming tidal currents carve
little ripple marks that remain after the tide goes out, looking like a
miniature model of the sea’s waves. These sand ripples hold small food
particles dropped by the currents, providing a store to be drawn on by
detritus feeders. The slope of the beach is so gentle that, when the
tide falls to its lowest ebb, a quarter of a mile of sand is exposed
between the high tide line and the low. But this broad sand flat is not
a perfectly even plain, for winding gullies wander across it, like
creeks across the land, holding a remnant of water from the last high
tide and providing a living place for animals that cannot endure even a
temporary withdrawal of the water.

It was in this place that I once found a large “bed” of sea pansies at
the very edge of the tide. The day was heavily overcast, a fact that
accounted for their being exposed. On sunny days I never saw them there,
although undoubtedly they were just under the sand, protecting
themselves from the drying rays of the sun.

But the day I saw them the pink and lavender flower faces were lifted so
that they were exposed at the surface of the sand, though so slightly
that one could easily pass them by unnoticed. Seeing them—even
recognizing them for what they were—there was a sense of incongruity in
finding what looked so definitely flowerlike here at the edge of the
sea.

These flattened, heart-shaped sea pansies, raised on short stems above
the sand, are not plants but animals. They belong to the same general
group of simple beings as the jellyfish, sea anemones, and corals, but
to find their nearest relatives one would have to desert the shore and
go down to some deep-lying offshore bottom where, as fernlike growths in
a strange animal forest, the sea pens thrust long stalks into the soft
ooze.

Each sea pansy growing here at the edge of the tide is the product of a
minute larva that once dropped from the currents to this shore. But
through the extraordinary course of its development it has ceased to be
that single being of its origin and has become instead a group or colony
of many individuals, bound together into a whole of flowerlike form. The
various individuals or polyps all have the shape of little tubes
embedded in the fleshy substance of the colony. But some of the tubes
bear tentacles and look like very small sea anemones; these capture food
for the colony, and in the proper season form reproductive cells. Other
tubes lack tentacles; these are the engineers of the colony, attending
to the functions of water-intake and control. A hydraulic system of
changing water pressure controls the movements of the colony; as the
stem is made turgid it maybe thrust down into the sand, drawing the main
body after it.

As the rising tide streams over the flattened shapes of the sea pansies,
all the tentacles of the feeding polyps are thrust up, reaching for the
living motes that dance in the water—the copepods, the diatoms, the
fish larvae small and tenuous as threads.

And at night the shallow water, rippling gently over these flats, must
glow softly with hundreds of little lights marking out the zone where
the sea pansies live, in a serpentine line of gleaming points, just as
lights seen from an airplane at night wander across the dark landscape
and show the path of settlement along a highway. For the sea pansies,
like their deep-sea relatives, are beautifully luminescent.

In season, the tide sweeping over these flats carries many small,
pear-shaped, swimming larvae from which new colonies of pansies will
develop. In past ages, the currents that traversed the open water then
separating North and South America carried such larvae, which
established themselves on the Pacific coast, north to Mexico and south
to Chile. Then a bridge of land rose between the American continents,
closing the water highway. Today the presence of sea pansies on both
Atlantic and Pacific coasts is one of the living reminders of that past
geologic time when North and South America were separated, and sea
creatures passed freely from one ocean to the other.

In that liquescent sand at the edge of the low tide, I often saw small
bubblings and boilings under the surface as one or another of the sand
dwellers slipped in or out of its hidden world.

There were sand dollars, or keyhole urchins, thin as wafers. As one of
them buried itself the forward edge slipped obliquely into the sand,
passing with effortless ease from the world of sunlight and water into
those dim regions of which my senses knew nothing. Internally, the
shells are strengthened for burrowing, and against the force of surf, by
supporting pillars that occupy most of the region between upper and
lower shells except in the center of the disc. The surface of the animal
is covered with minute spines, soft as felt. The spines shimmered in the
sunlight as their waving movements set up currents that kept the sand
grains in motion and eased the passage of the creature from water into
earth. On the back of the disc was dimly marked out a design like a
five-petaled flower. Repeating the meaning and the symbolism of the
number five—the sign of the echinoderms—were five holes perforating
the flat disc. As the animal progressed just under the shifting film of
surface sand, grains moved up from the under side through the holes,
aiding its forward movement and spreading a concealing veil of sand over
its body.

The sand dollars shared their dark world with other echinoderms. Down in
the wet sand lived heart urchins, which one never sees at the surface
until the thin little boxes that once contained them are found by the
tide and carried in to the beach, to be blown about by the wind and left
at last in the litter of the high tide line. The oddly shaped heart
urchins lay in chambers six inches or more below the surface of the
sand, keeping open for themselves channels lined with sticky mucus;
through these they reached up to the floor of the shallow sea, finding
diatoms and other particles of food among the sand grains.

And sometimes a starlike pattern twinkled in that firmament of sand,
proclaiming that one of the sand-dwelling starfishes lay below, marking
out its image by the flow of water currents, as the animal drew sea
water through its body for respiration, expelling it through many pores
on its upper surface. If the sand was disturbed, the astral image
trembled and faded, like a star disappearing in mist, as the animal
glided away rapidly, paddling through the sand with flattened tube feet.

Walking back across the flats of that Georgia beach, I was always aware
that I was treading on the thin rooftops of an underground city. Of the
inhabitants themselves little or nothing was visible. There were the
chimneys and stacks and ventilating pipes of underground dwellings, and
various passages and runways leading down into darkness. There were
little heaps of refuse that had been brought up to the surface as though
in an attempt at some sort of civic sanitation. But the inhabitants
remained hidden, dwelling silently in their dark, incomprehensible
world.

The most numerous inhabitants of this city of burrowers were the ghost
shrimps. Their holes were everywhere over the tidal flat, in diameter
considerably smaller than a lead pencil, and surrounded by a little pile
of fecal pellets. The pellets accumulate in great quantity because of
the shrimp’s way of life; it must eat an enormous amount of sand and mud
to obtain the food that is mixed with this indigestible material. The
holes are the visible entrances to burrows that extend down several feet
into the sand—long, nearly vertical passageways from which other
tunnels lead off, some continuing down into the dark, damp basement of
this shrimp city, others leading up to the surface as though to provide
emergency exit doors.

The owners of the burrows did not show themselves unless I tricked them
into it by dropping sand grains, a few at a time, into their entrance
halls. The ghost shrimp is a curiously formed creature with a long
slender body. It seldom goes abroad and so has no need of a hard
protective skeleton; it is covered, instead, with a flexible cuticle
suited to the narrow tunnel in which it must be able to dig and turn
about. On the under side of its body are several pairs of flattened
appendages that beat continually to force a current of water through the
burrow, for in the deep sand layers the oxygen supply is poor, and
aerated water must be drawn down from above. When the tide comes in, the
ghost shrimps go up to the mouths of their burrows and begin their work
of sifting the sand grains for bacteria, diatoms, and perhaps larger
particles of organic detritus. The food is brushed out of the sand by
means of little hairs on several of the appendages, and is then
transferred to the mouth.

Few of those who build permanent homes in this underground city of sand
live by themselves. On the Atlantic coast, the ghost shrimp regularly
gives lodging to a small rotund crab, related to the species often found
in oysters. The pea crab, Pinnixa, finds in the well-aerated burrow of
the shrimp both shelter and a steady supply of food. It strains food out
of the water currents that flow through the burrow, using little
feathery outgrowths of its body as nets. On the California coast the
ghost shrimp shelters as many as ten different species of animals. One
is a fish—a small goby—that uses the burrow as a casual refuge while
the tide is out, roaming through the passageways of the shrimp’s home
and pushing past the owner when necessary. Another is a clam that lives
outside the burrow but thrusts its siphons through the walls and takes
food from the water circulating through the tunnel. The clam has short
siphons and in ordinary circumstances would have to live just under the
surface of the sand to reach water and its food supply; by establishing
connection with the shrimp’s burrow it is able to enjoy the protective
advantages of living at a deeper level.

On the muddier parts of these same Georgia flats the lugworm lives, its
presence marked by round black domes, like low volcanic cones. Wherever
the lugworms occur, on shores of America and Europe, their prodigious
toil leavens and renews the beaches and keeps the amount of decaying
organic matter in proper balance. Where they are abundant, they may work
over in a year nearly two thousand tons of soil per acre. Like its
counterpart on land, the earthworm, the lugworm passes quantities of
soil through its body. The food in decaying organic debris is absorbed
by its digestive tract; the sand is expelled in neat, coiled castings
that betray the presence of the worm. Near every dark cone, a small,
funnel-shaped depression appears in the sand. The worm lies within the
sand in the shape of the letter U, the tail under the cone, the head
under the depression. When the tide rises, the head is thrust out to
feed.

Other signs of the lugworm appear in midsummer—large, translucent, pink
sacs, each bobbing about in the water like a child’s balloon, with one
end drawn down into the sand. These compact masses of jelly are the egg
masses of the worm, within each of which as many as 300,000 young are
undergoing development.

Vast plains of sand are continually worked over by these and other
marine worms. One—the trumpet worm—uses the very sand that contains
its food to make a cone-shaped tube for the protection of its soft body
in tunneling. One may sometimes see the living trumpet worm at work, for
it allows its tube to project slightly above the surface. It is much
more common, however, to find the empty tubes in the tidal debris.
Despite their fragile appearance, they remain intact long after their
architects are dead—natural mosaics of sand, one grain thick, the
building stones fitted together with meticulous care.

A Scot named A. T. Watson once spent many years studying the habits of
this worm. Because tube-building goes on under ground, he found it
almost impossibly difficult to observe the fitting into place and
cementing of sand grains until he hit upon the idea of collecting very
young larvae, which could live and be observed in a thin layer of sand
in the bottom of a laboratory dish. The building of the tube was begun
soon after the larvae had ceased to swim about and had settled on the
bottom of the dish. First each secreted a membranous tube about itself.
This was to become the inner lining of the cone, and the foundation for
the sand-grain mosaic. These young larvae had only two tentacles, which
they used to collect grains of sand and pass them to the mouth. There
the grains were rolled about experimentally, and if found suitable, were
deposited on the chosen spot at the edge of the tube. Then a little
fluid was expelled from the cement gland, after which the worm rubbed
certain shield-like structures over the tube as though to smooth it.

“Each tube,” wrote Watson, “is the life work of the tenant, and is most
beautifully built with grains of sand, each grain placed in position
with all the skill and accuracy of a human builder. . . The moment when
an exact fit has been obtained is evidently ascertained by an exquisite
sense of touch. On one occasion I saw the worm slightly alter (before
cementing) the position of a sand grain which it had just deposited.”

The tubes serve to house the owners during a lifetime of subterranean
tunneling, for like the lugworm, this species finds its food in the
subsurface sands. The digging organs, like the tubes, belie their
fragile appearance. They are slender, sharp-pointed bristles arranged in
two groups, or “combs,” which look fantastically impractical. We could
easily believe that someone, in whimsical mood, had cut them out of
shining golden foil, fringing the margins with repeated snips of the
scissors to fashion a Christmas tree ornament.

I have watched the worms at work, in a miniature world of sand and sea
created for them in my laboratory. Even in a thin layer of sand in a
glass bowl, the combs are used with a sturdy efficiency that reminds one
of a bulldozer. The worm emerges slightly from the tube, thrusts the
combs into the sand, scoops up a load and throws it over its shoulder,
as it were; than it seems to scrape the shovel blades clean by drawing
them back over the edge of the tube. The whole thing is done with vigor
and dispatch, with motions alternately to right and left. The golden
shovels loosen the sand and allow the soft, food-gathering tentacles to
explore among the grains, and bring to the mouth the food they discover.

Down along the line of barrier islands that stands between the mainland
and the sea, the waves have cut inlets through which the tides pour into
the bays and sounds behind the islands. The seaward shores of the
islands are bathed by coastwise currents carrying their loads of sand
and silt, mile after mile. In the confusion of meeting the tides that
are racing to or from the inlets, the currents slacken and relax their
hold on some of the sediments. So, off the mouths of many of the inlets,
lines of shoals make out to sea—the wrecking sands of Diamond Shoal and
Frying Pan Shoal and scores of others, named or nameless. But not all of
the sediments are so deposited. Many are seized by the tides and swept
through the inlets, only to be dropped in the quieter waters inside.
Within the capes and the inlet mouths, in the bays and sounds, the
shoals build up. Where they exist the searching larvae or young of sea
creatures find them—creatures whose way of life requires quiet and
shallow water.

Within the shelter of Cape Lookout there are such shoals reaching upward
to the surface, emerging briefly into sun and air for the interval of
the low tide, then sinking again into the sea. They are seldom crossed
by heavy surf, and while the tidal currents that swirl over or around
them may gradually alter their shape and extent—today borrowing some of
their substance, tomorrow repaying it with sand or silt brought from
other areas—they are on the whole a stable and peaceful world for the
animals of the sands.

Some of the shoals bear the names of the creatures of air and water that
visit them—Shark, Sheepshead, Bird. To visit Bird Shoal, one goes out
by boat through channels winding through the Town Marsh of Beaufort and
comes ashore on a rim of sand held firm by the deep roots of beach
grasses—the landward border of the shoal. The burrows of thousands of
fiddler crabs riddle the muddy beach on the side facing the marshes. The
crabs shuffle across the flats at the approach of an intruder, and the
sound of many small chitinous feet is like the crackling of paper.
Crossing the ridge of sand, one looks out over the shoal. If the tide
still has an hour or two to fall to its ebb, one sees only a sheet of
water shimmering in the sun.

On the beach, as the tide falls, the border of wet sand gradually
retreats toward the sea. Offshore, a dull velvet patch takes form on the
shining silk of the water, like the back of an immense fish slowly
rolling out of the sea, as a long streak of sand begins to rise into
view.

On spring tides the peak of this great sprawling shoal rises farther out
of the water and is exposed longer; on the neaps, when the tidal pulse
is feeble and the water movements sluggish, the shoal remains almost
hidden, with a thin sheet of water rippling across it even at the low
point of the ebb. But on any low tide of the month, in calm weather, one
is able to wade out from the sand-dune rim over immense areas of the
shoal, in water so shallow and so glassy clear that every detail of the
bottom lies revealed.

Even on moderate tides I have gone so far out that the dry sand rim
seemed far away. Then deep channels began to cut across the outlying
parts of the shoal. Approaching them, I could see the bottom sloping
down out of crystal clarity into a green that was dull and opaque. The
steepness of the slope was accentuated when a little school of minnows
flickered across the shallows and down into the darkness in a cascade of
silver sparks. Larger fish wandered in from the sea along these narrow
passages between the shoals. I knew there were beds of sun ray clams
down there on the deeper bottoms, with whelks moving down to prey on
them. Crabs swam about or buried themselves to the eyes in the sandy
bottoms; then behind each crab two small vortices appeared in the sand,
marking the respiratory currents drawn in through the gills.

Where water—even the shallowest of layers—covered the shoal, life came
out of hiding. A young horseshoe crab hurried out into deeper water; a
small toadfish huddled down in a clump of eelgrass and croaked an
audible protest at the foot of a strange visitor in his world, where
human beings seldom intrude. A snail with neat black spirals around its
shell and a matching black foot and black, tubular siphons—a banded
tulip shell—glided rapidly over the bottom, tracing a clear track
across the sand.

Here and there the sea grasses had taken hold—those pioneers among the
flowering plants that are venturing out into salt water. Their flat leaf
blades pushed up through the sand and their interlacing roots lent
firmness and stability to the bottom. In such glades I found colonies of
a curious, sand-dwelling sea anemone. Because of their structure and
habits, anemones require some firm support to grip while reaching into
the water for food. In the north (or wherever there is firm bottom) they
grasp the rocks; here they gain the same end by pushing down into the
sand until only the crown of tentacles remains above the surface. The
sand anemone burrows by contracting the downward-pointing end of its
tube and thrusting downward, then as a slow wave of expansion travels up
the body, the creature sinks into the sand. It was strange to see the
soft tentacle-clusters of the anemones flowering here in the midst of
the sands, for anemones seem always to belong to the rocks; yet buried
in this firm bottom doubtless they were as secure as the great plumose
anemone blooming on the wall of a Maine tide pool.

Here and there over the grassy parts of the shoal the twin chimneys of
the parchment worm’s tubes protruded slightly above the sand. The worm
itself lives always underground, in a U-shaped tube whose narrowed tips
are the animal’s means of contact with the sea. Lying in its tube, it
uses fanlike projections of the body to keep a current of water
streaming through the dark tunnel of its home, bringing it the minute
plant cells that are its principal food, carrying away its waste
products and in season the seeds of a new generation.

The whole life of the worm is so spent except for the short period of
larval life at sea. The larva soon ceases to swim and, becoming
sluggish, settles to the bottom. It begins to creep about, perhaps
finding food in the diatoms lying in the troughs of the sand ripples. As
it creeps it leaves a trail of mucus. After perhaps a few days the young
worm begins to make short, mucus-coated tunnels, burrowing into thick
clumps of diatoms mixed with sand. From such a simple tunnel, extending
perhaps several times the length of its body, the larva pushes up
extensions to the surface of the sand, to create the U-shape. All later
tunnels are the result of repeated remodelings and extensions of this
one, to accommodate the growing body of the worm. After the worm dies
the limp, empty tubes are washed out of the sand and are common in the
flotsam of the beach.

At some time almost all parchment worms acquire lodgers—the small pea
crabs whose relatives inhabit the burrows of the ghost shrimps. Often
the association is for life. The crabs, lured by the continuous stream
of food-laden water, enter the worm tube while young, but soon become
too large to leave by the narrow exits. Nor does the worm itself
actually leave its tube, although occasionally one sees a specimen with
a regenerated head or tail—mute evidence that it may emerge enough to
tempt a passing fish or crab. Against such attacks it has no defense,
unless the weird blue-white light that illuminates its whole body when
disturbed may sometimes alarm an enemy.

Other little protruding chimneys raised above the surface of the shoal
belonged to the plumed or decorator worm, Diopatra. These occurred
singly, instead of in pairs. They were curiously adorned with bits of
shell or seaweed that effectively deceived the human eye, and were but
the exposed ends of tubes that sometimes extended down into the sand as
much as three feet. Perhaps the camouflage is effective also against
natural enemies, yet to collect the materials that it glues to all
exposed parts of its tube, the worm has to expose several inches of its
body. Like the parchment worm, it is able to regenerate lost tissues as
a defense against hungry fish.

As the tide ebbed away, the great whelks could be seen here and there
gliding about in search of their prey, the clams that lay buried in the
sands, drawing through their bodies a stream of sea water and filtering
from it microscopic plants. Yet the search of the whelks was not an
aimless one, for their keen taste sense guided them to invisible streams
of water pouring from the outlet siphons of the clams. Such a taste
trail might lead to a stout razor clam, whose shells afford only the
scantiest covering for its bulging flesh, or to a hard-shell clam, with
tightly closed valves. Even these can be opened by a whelk, which grips
the clam in its large foot and, by muscular contractions, delivers a
series of hammer blows with its own massive shell.

Nor does the cycle of life—the intricate dependence of one species upon
another—end there. Down in dark little dens of the sea floor live the
enemies of the whelks, the stone crabs of massive purplish bodies and
brightly colored crushing claws that are able to break away the whelk’s
shell, piece by piece. The crabs lurk in caves among the stones of
jetties, in holes eroded out of shell rock, or in man-made homes such as
old, discarded automobile tires. About their lairs, as about the abodes
of legendary giants, lie the broken remains of their prey.

If the whelks escape this enemy, another comes by air. The gulls visit
the shoal in numbers. They have no great claws to crush the shells of
their victims, but some inherited wisdom has taught them another device.
Finding an exposed whelk, a gull seizes it and carries it aloft. It
seeks a paved road, a pier, or even the beach itself, soars high into
the air and drops its prey, instantly following it earthward to recover
the treasure from among the shattered bits of shell.

Coming back over the shoal, I saw spiraling up out of the sand, over the
edge of a green undersea ravine, a looped and twisted strand—a tough
string of parchment on which were threaded many scores of little
purse-shaped capsules. This was the egg string of a female whelk, for it
was June, and the spawning time of the species. In all the capsules, I
knew, the mysterious forces of creation were at work, making ready
thousands of baby whelks, of which perhaps hundreds would survive to
emerge from the thin round door in the wall of each capsule, each a tiny
being in a miniature shell like that of its parents.

Where the waves roll in from the open Atlantic, with no outlying islands
or curving arm of land to break the force of their attack on the beach,
the area between the tide lines is a difficult one for living things. It
is a world of force and change and constant motion, where even the sand
acquires some of the fluidity of water. These exposed beaches have few
inhabitants, for only the most specialized creatures can live on sand
amid heavy surf.

Animals of open beaches are typically small, always swift-moving. Theirs
is a strange way of life. Each wave breaking on the beach is at once
their friend and enemy; though it brings food, it threatens to carry
them out to sea in its swirling backwash. Only by becoming amazingly
proficient in rapid and constant digging can any animal exploit the
turbulent surf and shifting sand for the plentiful food supplies brought
in by the waves.

One of the successful exploiters is the mole crab, a surf-fisher who
uses nets so efficient that they catch even microorganisms adrift in the
water. Whole cities of mole crabs live where the waves are breaking,
following the flood tide shoreward, retreating toward the sea on the
ebb. Several times during the rising of a tide, a whole bed of them will
shift its position, digging in again farther up the beach in what is
probably a more favorable depth for feeding. In this spectacular mass
movement, the sand area suddenly seems to bubble, for in a strangely
concerted action, like the flocking of birds or the schooling of fish,
the crabs all emerge from the sand as a wave sweeps over them. In the
rush of turbulent water they are carried up the beach; then, as the
wave’s force slackens, they dig into the sand with magical ease, by
means of a whirling motion of the tail appendages. With the ebbing of
the tide, the crabs return toward the low-water mark, again making the
journey in several stages. If by mischance a few linger until the tide
has dropped below them, these crabs dig down several inches into the wet
sand and wait for the return of the water.

As the name suggests, there is something mole-like in these small
crustaceans, with their flattened, pawlike appendages. Their eyes are
small and practically useless. Like all others who live within the sands
the crabs depend less on sight than on the sense of touch, made
wonderfully effective by the presence of many sensory bristles. But
without the long, curling, feathery antennae, so efficiently constructed
that even small bacteria become entangled in their strands, the mole
crab could not survive as a fisher of the surf. In preparing to feed,
the crab backs down into the wet sand until only the mouth parts and the
antennae are exposed. Although it lies facing the ocean, it makes no
attempt to take food from the incoming surf. Rather, it waits until a
wave has spent its force on the beach and the backwash is draining
seaward. When the spent wave has thinned to a depth of an inch or two,
the mole crab extends its antennae into the streaming current. After
“fishing” for a moment, it draws the antennae through the appendages
surrounding its mouth, picking off the captured food. And again in this
activity there is a curious display of group behavior, for when one crab
thrusts up its antennae, all the others of the colony promptly follow
its example.

It is an extraordinary thing to watch the sand come to life if one
happens to be wading where there is a large colony of the crabs. One
moment it may seem uninhabited. Then, in that fleeting instant when the
water of a receding wave flows seaward like a thin stream of liquid
glass, there are suddenly hundreds of little gnome-like faces peering
through the sandy floor—beady-eyed, long-whiskered faces set in bodies
so nearly the color of their background that they can barely be seen.
And when, almost instantly, the faces fade back into invisibility, as
though a host of strange little troglodytes had momentarily looked out
through the curtains of their hidden world and as abruptly retired
within it, the illusion is strong that one has seen nothing except in
imagination—that there was merely an apparition induced by the magical
quality of this world of shifting sand and foaming water.

Since their food-gathering activities keep them in the edge of the surf,
mole crabs are exposed to enemies from both land and water—birds that
probe in the wet sand, fish that swim in with the tide, feeding in the
rising water, blue crabs darting out of the surf to seize them. So the
mole crabs function in the sea’s economy as an important link between
the microscopic food of the waters and the large, carnivorous predators.

Even though the individual mole crab may escape the larger creatures
that hunt the tide lines, the span of life is short, comprising a
summer, a winter, and a summer. The crab begins life as a minute larva
hatched from an orange-colored egg that has been carried for months by
the mother crab, one of a mass firmly attached beneath her body. As the
time for hatching nears, the mother foregoes the feeding movements up
and down the beach with the other crabs and remains near the zone of the
low tide, so avoiding the danger of stranding her offspring on the sands
of the upper beach.

When it escapes from the protective capsule of the egg, the young larva
is transparent, large-headed, and large-eyed as are all crustacean
young, weirdly adorned with spines. It is a creature of the plankton,
knowing nothing of life in the sands. As it grows it molts, shedding the
vestments of its larval life. So it reaches a stage in which, although
still swimming in larval fashion with waving motions of its bristled
legs, it now seeks the bottom in the turbulent surf zone, where the
waves stir and loosen the sand. Toward the summer’s end there is another
molt, this time bringing transformation to the adult stage, with the
feeding behavior of the adult crabs.

During the protracted period of larval life, many of the young mole
crabs have made long coastwise journeys in the currents, so that their
final coming ashore (if they have survived the voyage) may be far from
the parental sands. On the Pacific coast, where strong surface currents
flow seaward, Martin Johnson found that great numbers of the crab larvae
are carried out over oceanic depths, doomed to certain destruction
unless they chance to find their way into a return current. Because of
the long larval life, some of the young crabs are carried as far as 200
miles offshore. Perhaps in the prevailing coastwise current of Atlantic
shores they travel even farther.

With the coming of winter the mole crabs remain active. In the northern
part of their range, where frost bites deep into the sands and ice may
form on the beaches, they go out beyond the low tide zone to pass the
cold months where a fathom or more of insulating water lies between them
and the wintry air. Spring is the mating season and by July most or all
of the males hatched the preceding summer have died. The females carry
their egg masses for several months until the young hatch; before winter
all of these females have died and only a single generation of the
species remains on the beach.

The only other creatures regularly at home between the tide lines of
wave-swept Atlantic beaches are the tiny coquina clams. The life of the
coquinas is one of extraordinary and almost ceaseless activity. When
washed out by the waves, they must dig in again, using the stout,
pointed foot as a spade to thrust down for a firm grip, after which the
smooth shell is pulled rapidly into the sand. Once firmly entrenched,
the clam pushes up its siphons. The intake siphon is about as long as
the shell and flares widely at the mouth. Diatoms and other food
materials brought in or stirred from the bottom by waves are drawn down
into the siphon.

Like the mole crabs, the coquinas shift higher or lower on the beach in
mass movements of scores or hundreds of individuals, perhaps to take
advantage of the most favorable depth of water. Then the sand flashes
with the brightly colored shells as the clams emerge from their holes
and let the waves carry them. Sometimes other small burrowers move with
the coquinas among the waves—companies of the little screw-shell,
Terebra, a carnivorous snail that preys on the coquina. Other enemies
are sea birds. The ring-billed gulls hunt the clams persistently,
treading them out of the sand in shallow water.

On any particular beach, the coquinas are transient inhabitants; they
seem to work an area for the food it provides, and then move on. The
presence on a beach of thousands of the beautifully variegated shells,
shaped like butterflies and crossed by radiating bands of color, may
mark only the site of a former colony.

Being only briefly and sporadically possessed by the sea in those
recurrent periods of the tides’ farthest advance, the high tide zone on
any shore has in its own nature something of the land as well as of the
sea. This intermediate, transitional quality pervades not only the
physical world of the upper beach but also its life. Perhaps the ebb and
flow of the tides has accustomed some of the intertidal animals, little
by little, to living out of water; perhaps this is the reason there are
among the inhabitants of this zone some who, at this moment of their
history, belong neither to the land nor entirely to the sea.

The ghost crab, pale as the dry sand of the upper beaches it inhabits,
seems almost a land animal. Often its deep holes are back where the
dunes begin to rise from the beach. Yet it is not an air-breather; it
carries with it a bit of the sea in the branchial chamber surrounding
its gills, and at intervals must visit the sea to replenish the water.
And there is another, almost symbolic return. Each of these crabs began
its individual life as a tiny creature of the plankton; after maturity
and in the spawning season, each female enters the sea again to liberate
her young.

If it were not for these necessities, the lives of the adult crabs would
be almost those of true land animals. But at intervals during each day
they must go down to the water line to wet their gills, accomplishing
their purpose with the least possible contact with the sea. Instead of
wading directly into the water, they take up a position a little above
the place where, at the moment, most of the waves are breaking on the
beach. They stand sideways to the water, gripping the sand with the legs
on the landward side. Human bathers know that in any surf an occasional
wave will tower higher than the others and run farther up the beach. The
crabs wait, as if they also know this, and after such a wave has washed
over them, they return to the upper beach.

They are not always wary of contact with the sea. I have a mental
picture of one sitting astride a sea-oats stem on a Virginia beach, one
stormy October day, busily putting into its mouth food particles that it
seemed to be picking off the stem. It munched away, intent on its
pleasant occupation, ignoring the great, roaring ocean at its back.
Suddenly the foam and froth of a breaking wave rolled over it, hurling
the crab from the stem and sending both slithering up the wet beach. And
almost any ghost crab, hard pressed by a person trying to catch it, will
dash into the surf as though choosing a lesser evil. At such times they
do not swim, but walk along on the bottom until their alarm has subsided
and they venture out again.

Although on cloudy days and even occasionally in full sunshine the crabs
may be abroad in small numbers, they are predominantly hunters of the
night beaches. Drawing from the cloak of darkness a courage they lack by
day, they swarm boldly over the sand. Sometimes they dig little
temporary pits close to the water line, in which they lie watching for
what the sea may bring them.

The individual crab in its brief life epitomizes the protracted racial
drama, the evolutionary coming-to-land of a sea creature. The larva,
like that of the mole crab, is oceanic, becoming a creature of the
plankton once it has hatched from the egg that has been incubated and
aerated by the mother. As the infant crab drifts in the currents it
sheds its cuticle several times to accommodate the increasing size of
its body; at each molt it undergoes slight changes of form. Finally the
last larval stage, called the megalops, is reached. This is the form in
which all the destiny of the race is symbolized, for it—a tiny creature
alone in the sea—must obey whatever instinct drives it shoreward, and
must make a successful landing on the beach. The long processes of
evolution have fitted it to cope with its fate. Its structure is
extraordinary when compared with like stages of closely related crabs.
Jocelyn Crane, studying these larvae in various species of ghost crabs,
found that the cuticle is always thick and heavy, the body rounded. The
appendages are grooved and sculptured so that they may be folded down
tightly against the body, each fitting precisely against the adjacent
ones. In the hazardous act of coming ashore, these structural
adaptations protect the young crab against the battering of the surf and
the scraping of sand.

Once on the beach, the larva digs a small hole, perhaps as protection
from the waves, perhaps as a shelter in which to undergo the molt that
will transform it into the shape of the adult. From then on, the life of
the young crab is a gradual moving up the beach. When small it digs its
burrows in wet sand that will be covered by the rising tide. When
perhaps half grown, it digs above the high tide line; when fully adult
it goes well back into the upper beach or even among the dunes,
attaining then the farthest point of the landward movement of the race.

On any beach inhabited by ghost crabs, their burrows appear and
disappear in a daily and seasonal rhythm related to the habits of the
owners. During the night the mouths of the burrows stand open while the
crabs are out foraging on the beach. About dawn the crabs return.
Whether each goes, as a rule, to the burrow it formerly occupied or
merely to any convenient one is uncertain—the habit may vary with
locality, the age of the crab, and other changing conditions.

Most of the tunnels are simple shafts running down into the sand at an
angle of about forty-five degrees, ending in an enlarged den. Some few
have an accessory shaft leading up from the chamber to the surface. This
provides an emergency exit to be used if an enemy—perhaps a larger and
hostile crab—comes down the main shaft. This second shaft usually runs
to the surface almost vertically. It is farther away from the water than
the main tunnel, and may or may not break through the surface of the
sand.

The early morning hours are spent repairing, enlarging, or improving the
burrow selected for the day. A crab hauling up sand from its tunnel
always emerges sideways, its load of sand carried like a package under
the legs of the functional rear end of the body. Sometimes, immediately
on reaching the burrow mouth, it will hurl the sand violently away and
flash back into the hole; sometimes it will carry it a little distance
away before depositing it. Often the crabs stock their burrows with food
and then retire into them; nearly all crabs close the tunnel entrances
about midday.

All through the summer the occurrence of holes on the beach follows this
diurnal pattern. By autumn most of the crabs have moved up to the dry
beach beyond the tide; their holes reach deeper into the sand as though
their owners were feeling the chill of October. Then, apparently, the
doors of sand are pulled shut, not to be opened again until spring. For
the winter beaches show no sign either of the crabs or of their
holes—from dime-sized youngsters to full-grown adults, all have
disappeared, presumably into the long sleep of hibernation. But, walking
the beach on a sunny day in April, one will see here and there an open
burrow. And presently a ghost crab in an obviously new and shiny spring
coat may appear at its door and very tentatively lean on its elbows in
the spring sunshine. If there is a lingering chill in the air, it will
soon retire and close its door. But the season has turned, and under all
this expanse of upper beach, crabs are awakening from their sleep.

Like the ghost crab, the small amphipod known as the sand hopper or
beach flea portrays one of those dramatic moments of evolution, in which
a creature abandons an old way of life for a new. Its ancestors were
completely marine; its remote descendants, if we read its future aright,
will be terrestrial. Now it is midway in the transition from a sea life
to a land life.

As in all such transitional existences, there are strange little
contradictions and ironies in its way of life. The sand hopper has
progressed as far as the upper beach; its predicament is that it is
bound to the sea, yet menaced by the very element that gave it life.
Apparently it never enters the water voluntarily. It is a poor swimmer
and may drown if long submerged. Yet it requires dampness and probably
needs the salt in the beach sand, and so it remains in bondage to the
water world.

The movements of the sand hoppers follow the rhythm of the tides and the
alternation of day and night. On the low tides that fall during the dark
hours, they roam far into the intertidal zone in search of food. They
gnaw at bits of sea lettuce or eelgrass or kelp, their small bodies
swaying with the vigor of their chewing. In the litter of the tide lines
they find morsels of dead fish or crab shells containing remnants of
flesh; so the beach is cleaned and the phosphates, nitrates, and other
mineral substances are recovered from the dead for use by the living.

If low water has fallen late in the night, the amphipods continue their
foraging until shortly before daybreak. Before light has tinged the sky,
however, all of the hoppers begin to move up the beach toward the
high-water line. There each begins to dig the burrow into which it will
retreat from daylight and rising water. As it works rapidly, it passes
back the grains of sand from one pair of feet to the next until, with
the third pair of thoracic legs, it piles the sand behind it. Now and
then the small digger straightens out its body with a snap, so that the
accumulated sand is thrown out of the hole. It works furiously at one
wall of the tunnel, bracing itself with the fourth and fifth pairs of
legs, then turns and begins work on the opposite wall. The creature is
small and its legs are seemingly fragile, yet the tunnel may be
completed within perhaps ten minutes, and a chamber hollowed out at the
end of the shaft. At its maximum depth this shaft represents as
prodigious a labor as though a man, working with no tools but his hands,
had dug for himself a tunnel about 60 feet deep.

The work of excavation done, the sand flea often returns to the mouth of
its burrow to test the security of the entrance door, formed by the
accumulation of sand from the deeper parts of the shaft. It may thrust
out its long antennae from the mouth of the burrow, feeling the sand,
tugging at the grains to draw more of them into the hole. Then it curls
up within the dark snug chamber.

As the tide rises overhead, the vibrations of breaking waves and
shoreward-pressing tides may come down to the little creature in its
burrow, bringing a warning that it must stay within to avoid water and
the dangers brought by water. It is less easy to understand what arouses
the protective instinct to avoid daylight, with all the dangers of
foraging shore birds. There can be little difference between day and
night in that deep burrow. Yet in some mysterious way the beach flea is
held within the safety of the sandy chamber until the two essential
conditions again prevail on the beach—darkness and a falling tide. Then
it awakens from sleep, creeps up the long shaft, and pushes away the
sand door. Once again the dark beach stretches before it, and a
retreating line of white froth at the edge of the tide marks the
boundary of its hunting grounds.

Each den that is dug with so much labor is merely a shelter for one
night, or one tidal interval. After the low tide feeding period, each
hopper will dig itself a new refuge. The holes that we see on the upper
beach lead down to empty burrows from which the former occupants have
gone. An occupied burrow has its “door” closed, and so its location
cannot easily be detected. On the sandy edge of the sea there is, then,
the abundant life of protected beaches and shoals, the sparse life of
surf-swept sands, and the pioneering life that has reached the high tide
line and seems poised in space and time for invasion of the land.

But the sands contain also the record of other lives. A thin net of
flotsam is spread over the beaches—the driftage of ocean brought to
rest on the shore. It is a fabric of strange composition, woven with
tireless energy by wind and wave and tide. The supply of materials is
endless. Caught in the strands of dried beach grass and seaweeds there
are crab claws and bits of sponge, scarred and broken mollusk shells,
old spars crusted with sea growths, the bones of fishes, the feathers of
birds. The weavers use the materials at hand, and the design of the net
changes from north to south. It reflects the kind of bottom
offshore—whether rolling sand hills or rocky reefs; it subtly hints of
the nearness of a warm, tropical current, or tells of the intrusion of
cold water from the north. In the litter and debris of the beach there
may be few living creatures, but there is the suggestion, the intimation
of a million, million lives, lived in the sands nearby or brought to
this place from far sea distances.

In the beach flotsam there are often strays from the surface waters of
the open ocean, reminders of the fact that most sea creatures are the
prisoners of the particular water masses they inhabit. When tongues of
their native waters, driven by winds or drawn by varying temperature or
salinity patterns, stray into unaccustomed territory, this drifting life
is carried involuntarily with them.

In the several centuries that men of inquiring mind have been walking
the world’s shores many unknown sea animals have been discovered as
strays from the open ocean in the flotsam of the tide lines. One such
mysterious link between the open sea and the shore is the ramshorn
shell, Spirula. For many years only the shell had been known—a small
white spiral forming two or three loose coils. By holding such a shell
to the light, one can see that it is divided into separate chambers, but
seldom is there a trace of the animal that built and inhabited it. By
1912, about a dozen living specimens had been found, but still no one
knew in what part of the sea the creature lived. Then Johannes Schmidt
undertook his classic researches into the life history of the eel,
crossing and recrossing the Atlantic and towing plankton nets at
different levels from the surface down into depths perpetually black.
Along with the glass-clear larvae of the eels that were the object of
his search, he brought up other animals—among them many specimens of
Spirula, which had been caught swimming at various depths down to a
mile. In their zone of greatest abundance, which seems to lie between
900 and 1500 feet, they probably occur in dense schools. They are little
squidlike animals with ten arms and a cylindrical body, bearing fins
like propellers at one end. Placed in an aquarium, they are seen to swim
with jerky, backward spurts of jet-propelled motion.

It may seem mysterious that the remains of such a deep-sea animal should
come to rest in beach deposits, but the reason is, after all, not
obscure. The shell is extremely light; when the animal dies and begins
to decay, the gases of decomposition probably lift it toward the
surface. There the fragile shell begins a slow drift in the currents,
becoming a natural “drift bottle” whose eventual resting place is a clue
not so much to the distribution of the species as to the course of the
currents that bore it. The animals themselves live over deep oceans,
perhaps most abundantly above the steep slopes that descend from the
edges of the continents into the abyss. In such depths, they seem to
occupy tropical and subtropical belts around the world. Now, in this
little shell curved like the horn of a ram, we have one of the few
persisting reminders of the days when great, spiral-shelled “cuttlefish”
swarmed in the oceans of the Jurassic and earlier periods. All other
cephalopods, except the pearly or chambered nautilus of the Pacific and
Indian Oceans, have either abandoned their shells or converted them to
internal remnants.

And sometimes, among the tidal debris, there appears a thin papery
shell, bearing on its white surface a ribbed pattern like that which
shore currents impress upon the sand. It is the shell of the paper
nautilus or argonaut, an animal distantly related to an octopus, and
like it having eight arms. The argonaut lives on the high seas, in both
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. The “shell” is actually an elaborate egg
case or cradle secreted by the female for the protection of her young.
It is a separate structure that she can enter or leave at will. The much
smaller male (about one tenth the size of his mate) secretes no shell.
He inseminates the female in the strange manner of some other
cephalopods: one of his arms breaks off and enters the mantle cavity of
the female, carrying a load of spermatophores. For a long while the male
of this creature went unrecognized. Cuvier, a French zoologist of the
early nineteenth-century, was familiar with the detached arm but
supposed it to be an independent animal, probably a parasitic worm. The
argonaut is not the chambered or pearly nautilus of Holmes’s famous
poem. Although also a cephalopod, the pearly nautilus belongs to a
different group and bears a true shell secreted by the mantle. It
inhabits tropical seas, and like Spirula is a descendant of the great
spiral-shelled mollusks that dominated the seas of Mesozoic times.

Storms bring in many strays from tropical waters. In a shell shop at
Nags Head, North Carolina, I once attempted to buy the beautiful violet
snail, Janthina. The proprietor of the shop refused to sell this, her
only specimen. I understood why when she told me of finding the living
Janthina on the beach after a hurricane, its marvelous float still
intact, and the surrounding sand stained purple as the little animal
tried, in its extremity, to use its only defense against disaster. Later
I found an empty shell, light as thistledown, resting in a depression in
the coral rock of Key Largo, where some gentle tide had laid it. I have
never been so fortunate as my acquaintance at Nags Head, for I have
never seen the living animal.

Janthina is a pelagic snail that drifts on the surface of the open
ocean, hanging suspended from a raft of frothy bubbles. The raft is
formed from mucus that the animal secretes; the mucus entraps bubbles of
air, then hardens into a firm, clear substance like stiff cellophane. In
the breeding season the snail fastens its egg capsules to the under side
of the raft, which throughout the year serves to keep the little animal
afloat.

Like most snails, Janthina is carnivorous; its prey is found among other
plankton animals, including small jellyfishes, crustaceans, and even
small goose barnacles. Now and then a swooping gull drops from the sky
and takes a snail—but for the most part the bubble raft must be
excellent camouflage, almost indistinguishable from a bit of drifting
sea froth. There must be other enemies that come from below, for the
blue-to-violet tints of the shell (which hangs below the raft) are the
colors worn by many creatures that live at or near the surface film and
need to conceal themselves from enemies looking up from below.

The strong northward flow of the Gulf Stream bears on its surface fleets
of living sails—those strange coelenterates of the open sea, the
siphonophores. Because of adverse winds and currents these small craft
sometimes come into shallow water and are stranded on the beaches. This
happens most often in the south, but the southern coast of New England
also receives strays from the Gulf Stream, for the shallows west of
Nantucket act as a trap to collect them. Among such strays, the
beautiful azure sail of the Portuguese man-of-war, Physalia, is known to
almost everyone, for so conspicuous an object can hardly be missed by
any beach walker. The little purple sail, or by-the-wind sailor,
Velella, is known to fewer, perhaps because of its much smaller size and
the fact that once left on the beach it dries quickly to an object that
is hard to identify. Both are typically inhabitants of tropical waters,
but in the warmth of the Gulf Stream they may sometimes go all the way
across to the coast of Great Britain, where in certain years they appear
in numbers.

In life the oval float of Velella is a beautiful blue color, with a
little elevated crest or sail passing diagonally across it. The disc is
about an inch and a half long and half as wide. This is not one animal
but a composite one, or colony of inseparably associated
individuals—the multiple offspring of a single fertilized egg. The
various individuals carry on separate functions. A feeding individual
hangs suspended from the center of the float. Small reproductive
individuals cluster around it. Around the periphery of the float,
feeding individuals in the form of long tentacles hang down to capture
the small fry of the sea.

A whole fleet of Portuguese men-of-war is sometimes seen from vessels
crossing the Gulf Stream when some peculiarity of the wind and current
pattern has brought together a number of them. Then one can sail for
hours or days with always some of the siphonophores in sight. With the
float or sail set diagonally across its base, the creature sails before
the wind; looking down into the clear water one can see the tentacles
trailing far below the float. The Portuguese man-of-war is like a small
fishing boat trailing a drift net, but its “net” is more nearly like a
group of high-voltage wires, so deadly is the sting of the tentacles to
almost any fish or other small animal unlucky enough to encounter them.

The true nature of the man-of-war is difficult to grasp, and indeed many
aspects of its biology are unknown. But, as with Velella, the central
fact is that what appears to be one animal is really a colony of many
different individuals, although no one of them could exist
independently. The float and its base are thought to be one individual;
each of the long trailing tentacles another. The food-capturing
tentacles, which in a large specimen may extend down for 40 or 50 feet,
are thickly studded with nematocysts or stinging cells. Because of the
toxin injected by these cells, Physalia is the most dangerous of all the
coelenterates.

For the human bather, even glancing contact with one of the tentacles
produces a fiery welt; anyone heavily stung is fortunate to survive. The
exact nature of the poison is unknown. Some people believe there are
three toxins involved, one producing paralysis of the nervous system,
another affecting respiration, the third resulting in extreme
prostration and death, if a large dose is received. In areas where
Physalia is abundant, bathers have learned to respect it. On some parts
of the Florida coast the Gulf Stream passes so close inshore that many
of these coelenterates are borne in toward the beaches by onshore winds.
The Coast Guard at Lauderdale-by-the-Sea and other such places, when
posting reports of tides and water temperatures, often includes
forecasts of the relative number of Physalias to be expected inshore.

Because of the highly toxic nature of the nematocyst poisons, it is
extraordinary to find a creature that apparently is unharmed by them.
This is the small fish Nomeus, which lives always in the shallow of a
Physalia. It has never been found in any other situation. It darts in
and out among the tentacles with seeming impunity, presumably finding
among them a refuge from enemies. In return, it probably lures other
fish within range of the man-of-war. But what of its own safety? Is it
actually immune to the poisons? Or does it live an incredibly hazardous
life? A Japanese investigator reported years ago that Nomeus actually
nibbles away bits of the stinging tentacles, perhaps in this way
subjecting itself to minute doses of the poison throughout its life and
so acquiring immunity. But some recent workers contend that the fish has
no immunity whatever, and that every live Nomeus is simply a very lucky
fish.

The sail, or float, of a Portuguese man-of-war is filled with gas
secreted by the so-called gas gland. The gas is largely nitrogen (85 to
91 per cent) with a small amount of oxygen and a trace of argon.
Although some siphonophores can deflate the air sac and sink into deep
water if the surface is rough, Physalia apparently cannot. However, it
does have some control over the position and degree of expansion of the
sac. I once had a graphic demonstration of this when I found a
medium-size man-of-war stranded on a South Carolina beach. After keeping
it overnight in a bucket of salt water, I attempted to return it to the
sea. The tide was ebbing; I waded out into the chilly March water,
keeping the Physalia in its bucket out of respect for its stinging
abilities, then hurled it as far into the sea as I could. Over and over,
the incoming waves caught it and returned it to the shallows. Sometimes
with my help, sometimes without, it would manage to take off again,
visibly adjusting the shape and position of the sail as it scudded along
before the wind, which was blowing out of the south, straight up the
beach. Sometimes it could successfully ride over an incoming wave;
sometimes it would be caught and hustled and bumped along through
thinning waters. But whether in difficulty or enjoying momentary
success, there was nothing passive in the attitude of the creature.
There was, instead, a strong illusion of sentience. This was no helpless
bit of flotsam, but a living creature exerting every means at its
disposal to control its fate. When I last saw it, a small blue sail far
up the beach, it was pointed out to sea, waiting for the moment it could
take off again.

Although some of the derelicts of the beach reflect the pattern of the
surface waters, others reveal with equal clarity the nature of the sea
bottom offshore. For thousands of miles from southern New England to the
tip of Florida the continent has a continuous rim of sand, extending in
width from the dry sand hills above the beaches far out across the
drowned lands of the continental shelf. Yet here and there within this
world of sand there are hidden rocky areas. One of these is a scattered
and broken chain of reefs and ledges, submerged beneath the green waters
off the Carolinas, sometimes close inshore, sometimes far out on the
western edge of the Gulf Stream. Fishermen call them “black rocks”
because the blackfish congregate around them. The charts refer to
“coral” although the closest reef-building corals are hundreds of miles
away, in southern Florida.

In the 1940’s, biologist divers from Duke University explored some of
these reefs and found that they are not coral, but an outcropping of a
soft claylike rock known as marl. It was formed during the Miocene many
thousands of years ago, then buried under layers of sediment and drowned
by a rising sea. As the divers described them, these submerged reefs are
low-lying masses of rock sometimes rising a few feet above the sand,
sometimes eroded away to level platforms from which swaying forests of
brown sargassum grow. In deep fissures other algae find places of
attachment. Much of the rock is smothered under curious sea growths,
plant and animal. The stony coralline algae, whose relatives paint the
low tide rocks of New England a deep, old-rose hue, encrust the higher
parts of the open reef and fill its interstices. Much of the reef is
covered by a thick veneer of twisting, winding, limy tubes—the work of
living snails and of tube-building worms, forming a calcareous layer
over the old, fossil rock. Through the years the accumulation of algae
and the growth of snail and worm tubes have added, little by little, to
the structure of the reef.

Where the reef rock is free from crusts of algae and worm tubes, boring
mollusks—date mussels, piddocks, and small boring clams—have drilled
into it, scraping out holes in which they lodge, while feeding on the
minute life of the water. Because of the firm support provided by the
reef, gardens of color bloom in the midst of the drabness of shifting
sand and silt. Sponges, orange or red or ocher, extend their branches
into the currents that drift across the reef. Fragile, delicately
branching hydroids rise from the rocks and from their pale “flowers,” in
season, tiny jellyfish swim away. Gorgonians are like tall wiry grasses,
orange and yellow. And a curious shrubby form of moss animal or bryozoan
lives here, the tough and gelatinous structure of its branches
containing thousands of tiny polyps, which thrust out tentacled heads to
feed. Often this bryozoan grows around a gorgonian, then appearing like
gray insulation around a dark, wiry core.

Were it not for the reefs, none of these forms could exist on this sandy
coast. But because, through the changing circumstances of geologic
history, the old Miocene rocks are now cropping out on this shallow sea
floor, there are places where the planktonic larvae of such animals,
drifting in the currents, may end their eternal quest for solidity.

After almost any storm, at such places as South Carolina’s Myrtle Beach,
the creatures from the reefs begin to appear on the intertidal sands.
Their presence is the visible result of a deep turbulence in the
offshore waters, with waves reaching down to sweep violently over those
old rocks that have not known the crash of surf since the sea drowned
them, thousands of years ago. The storm waves dislodge many of the fixed
and sessile animals and sweep off some of the free-living forms,
carrying them away into an alien world of sandy bottoms, of waters
shallowing ever more and more until there is no more water beneath them,
only the sands of the beach.

I have walked these beaches in the biting wind that lingers after a
northeast storm, with the waves jagged on the horizon and the ocean a
cold leaden hue, and have been stirred by the sight of masses of the
bright orange tree sponge lying on the beach, by smaller pieces of other
sponges, green and red and yellow, by glistening chunks of “sea pork” of
translucent orange or red or grayish white, by sea squirts like knobby
old potatoes, and by living pearl oysters still gripping the thin
branches of gorgonians. Sometimes there have been living starfish—the
dark red southern form of the rock-dwelling Asterias. Once there was an
octopus in distress on the wet sands where the waves had thrown it. But
life was still in it; when I helped it out beyond the breakers it darted
away.

Pieces of the ancient reef itself are commonly found on the sand at
Myrtle Beach and presumably at any place where such reefs lie offshore.
The marl is a dull gray cement-like rock, full of the borings of
mollusks and sometimes retaining their shells. The total number of
borers is always so great that one thinks how intense must be the
competition, down on that undersea rock platform, for every available
inch of solid surface, and how many larvae must fail to find a footing.

Another kind of “rock” occurs on the beach in chunks of varied size and
perhaps even more abundantly than the marl. It has almost the structure
of honeycomb taffy, being completely riddled with little twisting
passageways. The first time one sees this on the beach, especially if it
is half buried in sand, one might almost take it for one of the sponges,
until investigation proves it to be hard as rock. It is not of mineral
origin, however—it is built by small sea worms, dark of body and
tentacled of head. These worms, living in aggregations of many
individuals, secrete about themselves a calcareous matrix, which hardens
to the firmness of rock. Presumably it thickly encrusts the reefs or
builds up solid masses from a rocky floor. This particular kind of “worm
rock” had not been known from the Atlantic coast until Dr. Olga Hartman
identified my specimens from Myrtle Beach as “a matrix-building species
of Dodecaceria” whose closest relatives are Pacific and Indian Ocean
inhabitants. How and when did this particular species reach the
Atlantic? How extensive is its range there? These and many other
questions remain to be answered; they are one small illustration of the
fact that our knowledge is encompassed within restricted boundaries,
whose windows look out upon the limitless spaces of the unknown.

On the upper beach, beyond the zone where the flood tide returns the sea
water twice daily, the sands dry out. Then they are subjected to
excesses of heat; their arid depths are barren, with little to attract
life, or even to make life possible. The grains of dry sands rub one
against another. The winds seize them and drive them in a thin mist
above the beach, and the cutting edge of this wind-driven sand scours
the driftwood to a silver sheen, polishes the trunks of old derelict
trees, and scourges the birds that nest on the beach.

But if this area has little life within itself, it is full of the
reminders of other lives. For here above the high tide line, all the
empty shells of the mollusks come to rest. Visiting the beach that
borders Shackleford Shoals in North Carolina or Florida’s Sanibel
Island, one could almost believe that mollusks are the only inhabitants
of the sea’s edge, for their enduring remains dominate the beach debris
long after the more fragile remnants of crabs and sea urchins and
starfish have been returned to the elements. First the shells were
dropped low on the beach by the waves; then, tide by tide, they were
moved up across the sands to the line of the highest of the high tides.
Here they will remain, till buried in drifting sand or carried away in a
wild carnival of storm surf.

From north to south the composition of the shell windrows changes,
reflecting the changing communities of the mollusks. Every little pocket
of gravelly sand that accumulates in favorable spots amid the rocks of
northern New England is strewn with mussels and periwinkles. And when I
think of the sheltered beaches of Cape Cod I see in memory the windrows
of jingle shells being shifted gently by the tide, their thin,
scale-like valves (how can they house a living creature?) gleaming with
a satin sheen. The arched upper valve occurs more often in beach flotsam
than the flat lower one, which is perforated by a hole for the passage
of the strong byssus cord that attaches the jingle to a rock or to
another shell. Silver, gold, and apricot are the colors of the jingles,
set against the deep blue of the mussels that dominate these northern
shores. And scattered here and there are the ribbed fans of the scallops
and the little white sloops of the boat shells stranded on the beach.
The boat shell is a snail with a curiously modified shell, having a
little “half deck” on the lower surface. It often becomes attached to
its fellows in chains of half a dozen or more individuals. Each boat
shell is in its lifetime first male then female. In the chains of
attached shells those at the bottom of the chain are always females, the
upper animals males.

On the Jersey beaches and the coastal islands of Maryland and Virginia
the massive structure of the shells and the lack of ornamental spines
have a meaning—that the offshore world of shifting sand is deeply
stirred by the endless processions of the waves that roll in on this
coast. The thick shell of the surf clam is its defense against the force
of the waves. These shores are strewn, too, with the heavy armaments of
the whelks, and with the smooth globes of the moon snails.

From the Carolinas south the beach world seems to belong to the several
species of arks, whose shells outnumber all others. Though variously
shaped, their shells are stout, with long straight hinges. The ponderous
ark wears a black, beardlike growth, or periostracum, heavy in fresh
specimens, scanty or absent in beach-worn shells. The turkey wing is a
gaily colored ark, with reddish bands streaking its yellowish shell. It,
too, wears a thick periostracum, and lives down in deep offshore
crevices, where it attaches itself to rocks or any other support by a
strong line or byssus. While a few kinds of arks extend the range of
these mollusks throughout New England (for example, the small transverse
ark and the so-called bloody clam—one of the few mollusks that has red
blood) it is on southern beaches that the group becomes dominant. On
famed Sanibel Island on the west coast of Florida, where the variety of
shells is probably greater than anywhere else on our Atlantic coast, the
arks nevertheless make up about 95 per cent of the beach deposits.

The pen shells begin to appear in numbers on the beaches below Capes
Hatteras and Lookout, but perhaps they, too, live in the most prodigious
numbers on the Gulf coast of Florida. I have seen truckloads of them on
the beach at Sanibel even in calm winter weather. In a violent tropical
hurricane the destruction of this light-shelled mollusk is almost
incredible. Sanibel Island presents about fifteen miles of beach to the
Gulf of Mexico. On this strand, it has been estimated, about a million
pen shells have been hurled by a single storm, having been torn loose by
waves reaching down to bottoms lying as deep as 30 feet. The fragile
shells of the pens are ground together in the buffeting of storm surf;
many are broken, but even those not so destroyed have no way of
returning to the sea, and so are doomed. As if knowing this, the
commensal pea crabs that inhabit them creep out of the shells like the
proverbial rats abandoning a sinking ship; they may be seen by the
thousand swimming about in apparent bewilderment in the surf.

The pen shells spin anchoring byssus threads of golden sheen and
remarkable texture; the ancients spun their cloth of gold from the
byssus of the Mediterranean pens, producing a fabric so fine and soft it
could be drawn through a finger ring. The industry persists at Italian
Taranto, on the Ionian Sea, where gloves and other small garments are
woven of this natural fabric as curios or tourists’ souvenirs.

The survival of an undamaged angel wing in the debris of the upper beach
seems extraordinary, so delicately fragile does it appear. Yet these
valves of purest white, when worn by the living animals, are capable of
penetrating peat or firm clay. The angel wing is one of the most
powerful of the boring clams and, having very long siphons with which to
maintain communication with the sea water, is able to burrow deeply. I
have dug for them in peat beds in Buzzards Bay, and have found them on
beach exposures of peat on the coast of New Jersey, but their occurrence
north of Virginia is local and rare.

This purity of color, this delicacy of structure are buried throughout
life in a bank of clay, for the angel wing’s beauty seems destined to be
hidden from view until, after the death of the animal, the shells are
released by the waves and carried to the beach. In its dark prison the
angel wing conceals an even more mysterious beauty. Secure from enemies,
hidden from all other creatures, the animal itself glows with a strange
green light. Why? For whose eyes? For what reason?

Besides the shells, there are other objects in the beach flotsam that
are mysterious in shape and texture. Flat, horny or shell-like discs of
various shapes and sizes are the opercula of sea snails—the protective
doors that close over the opening when the animal has withdrawn into its
shell. Some opercula are round, some leaf-shaped, some like slender,
curving daggers. (The “cat’s eye” of the South Pacific is the operculum
of a snail, rounded on one surface and polished like a boy’s marble.)
The opercula of the various species are so characteristic in shape,
material, and structure that they are a useful means of identifying
otherwise difficult species.

The tidal flotsam abounds, too, in many little empty egg cases in which
various sea creatures passed their first days of life. These are of
various shapes and materials. The black “mermaid’s purses” belong to one
of the skates. They are flat, horny rectangles, with two long, curling
prongs or tendrils extending from each end. With these the parent skate
attaches the packet containing a fertilized egg to seaweeds on some
offshore bottom. After the young skate matures and hatches, its
discarded cradle is often washed up on the beach. Egg cases of the
banded tulip shell remind one of the dried seed pods of a flower, a
cluster of thin, parchment-like containers borne on a central stalk.
Those of the channeled or the knobbed whelks are long, spiraling strings
of little capsules, again parchment-like in texture. Each of the flat,
ovoid capsules contains scores of baby whelks, incredible in the minute
perfection of their shells. Sometimes a few remain in an egg string
found on the beach; they rattle against the hard walls of the capsule
like peas in a dried pod.

Perhaps the most baffling of all objects found on beaches are the egg
cases of the sand collar snail or moon snail. If someone had cut a
doll’s shoulder cape out of a piece of fine sandpaper, the result would
be about the same. The “collars” produced by the various species of the
family of moon snails differ in size and, though slightly, in shape. In
some the edges are smooth, in others scalloped. The arrangement of the
eggs also follows slightly different patterns in the various species.
This strange receptacle for the eggs of the snail is formed as a sheet
of mucus pushed out from under the foot and molded on the outside of the
shell. This results in the collar shape. The eggs are attached to the
under side of the collar, which becomes completely impregnated with sand
grains.

Mingled with the bits and fragments of sea creatures are the reminders
of man’s invasion of the sea—spars, pieces of rope, bottles, barrels,
boxes of many shapes and sizes. If these have been long at sea, they
bring their own collection of sea life, for in their period of drifting
in the currents, they have served as a solid place of attachment for the
searching larvae of the plankton.

On our Atlantic coast, the days following a northeast blow or a tropical
storm are a time to look for the driftage of open ocean. I remember such
a day on the beach at Nags Head, after a hurricane had passed by at sea
during the night. The wind was still blowing a gale; there was a fine
wild surf. That day the beach was strewn with many bits of driftwood,
branches of trees, and heavy planks and spars, many of which bore
growths of Lepas, the gooseneck barnacle of the open sea. One long plank
was studded with tiny barnacles the size of a mouse’s ear; on some of
the other drifted timbers the barnacles had grown to a length of an inch
or more, exclusive of the stalk. The size of the encrusting barnacles is
a rough index of the time the spar has been at sea. In the profusion of
their growth on almost every piece of timber one senses the incredible
abundance of barnacle larvae drifting in the sea, ready to grasp any
firm object adrift in their fluid world, for by strange irony none of
them could complete their development in the sea water alone. Each of
those weird-looking little beings, rowing through the water with
feathered appendages, had to find a hard surface to which it could
attach before assuming the adult form.

The life history of these stalked barnacles is very similar to that of
the acorn barnacles of the rocks. Within the hard shells is a small
crustacean body, bearing feathered appendages with which to sweep food
into their mouths. The chief difference is that the shells are borne on
a fleshy stalk instead of arising from a flat base firmly cemented to
the substratum. When the animals are not feeding, the shells can be
tightly closed, as in the rock barnacle; when they open to feed, there
are the same sweeping, rhythmical motions of the appendages.

Seeing on the shore a branch from some tree that evidently has been long
adrift and now is generously sprinkled with the fleshy brown stalks and
the ivory-hued shells of the barnacle, with their marginal tints of blue
and red, one can remember with tolerant understanding the old medieval
misconception that conferred on these strange crustaceans the name
“goose barnacle.” The seventeenth-century English botanist John Gerard
compiled a description of the “goose tree” or “Barnakle tree” on the
basis of the following experience: “Traveling upon the shores of our
English coast between Dover and Rummey, I founde the trunke of an olde
rotten tree, which . . . we drewe out of the water upon dry lande; on
this rotten tree I founde growing many thousands of long crimson
bladders . . . at the neather end whereof did grow a shell fish,
fashioned somewhat like a small Muskle . . . which after I had opened
. . . I found living things that were very naked, in shape like a Birde;
in others, the Birde covered with soft downe, the shell halfe open, and
the Birde readie to fall out, which no doubt were the foules called
Barnakles.” Evidently Gerard’s imaginative eye saw in the appendages of
the barnacles the resemblance to a bird’s feathers. On this slender
basis he built the following pure fabrication: “They spawne as it were
in March and April; the Geese are formed in Maie and June, and come to
fulnesse of feathers in the moneth after.” And so in many an old work of
un-natural history from this time on, we see drawings of trees bearing
fruit in the form of barnacles, and geese emerging from the shells to
fly away.

Old spars and water-soaked timbers cast on the beach are full of the
workings of the shipworm—long cylindrical tunnels penetrating all parts
of the wood. Usually nothing remains of the creatures themselves except
occasional fragments of their small calcareous shells; these proclaim
that the shipworm is a true mollusk, despite its long, slender, and
wormlike body.

There were shipworms long before there were men; yet within his own
short tenancy of earth, man has greatly increased their numbers. The
shipworm can live only in wood; if its young fail to discover some woody
substance at a critical period of their existence, they die. This
absolute dependence of a sea creature on something derived from the
continents seems strange and incongruous. There could have been no
shipworms until woody plants evolved on land. Their ancestors probably
were clamlike forms burrowing in mud or clay, merely using their
excavated holes as a base from which to extract the plankton of the sea.
Then after trees evolved, these forerunners of the shipworms adapted
themselves to a new habitat—the relatively few forest trees brought
into the sea by rivers. But their numbers over all the earth must have
been small until, scant thousands of years ago, men began to send wooden
vessels across the sea and to build wharves at its edge; in all such
wooden structures, the shipworm found a greatly extended range, to the
cost of the human race.

The shipworm’s place in history is secure. It was the scourge of the
Romans with their galleys, of the seagoing Greeks and Phoenicians, of
the explorers of the New World. In the 1700’s it riddled the dikes that
the Dutch had built to keep out the sea; by so doing it threatened the
very life of Holland. (As an academic by-product, the first extensive
studies of the shipworm were made by Dutch scientists, to whom knowledge
of its biology had become a matter of life and death. Snellius, in 1733,
pointed out for the first time that this animal is a clamlike mollusk,
not a worm.) About 1917 the shipworm invaded the harbor of San
Francisco. Before its inroads were even suspected, ferry slips had begun
to collapse, and wharves and loaded freight cars fell into the harbor.
During the Second World War, especially in all tropical waters, the
shipworm was an unseen but powerful enemy.

The female of the common shipworm retains the young in her burrow until
they have attained the larval stage. Then they are launched into the
sea—each a tiny being enclosed in two protective shells, looking like
any other young bivalve. If it encounters wood when it has reached the
threshold of adulthood, all goes well. It puts out a slender byssus
thread as an anchor, a foot develops, and the shells become modified
into efficient cutting tools, for rows of sharp ridges appear on their
outer surfaces. The burrowing begins. With a powerful muscle, the animal
scrapes the ridged shell against the wood, revolving meanwhile so that a
smooth, cylindrical burrow is cut. As the burrow is extended, usually
with the grain of the wood, the body of the shipworm grows. One end
remains attached to the wall near the tiny point of entrance. This bears
the siphons through which contact with the sea is maintained. The
penetrating end carries the small shells. Between stretches a body that
is thin as a lead pencil, but may reach a length of eighteen inches.
Although a timber may be infested with hundreds of larvae, the burrows
of the shipworms never interfere with each other. If an animal finds
itself coming close to another burrow, it invariably turns aside. As it
bores, it passes the loosened fragments of wood through its digestive
tract. Some of the wood is digested and converted into glucose. This
ability to digest cellulose is rare in the animal world—only certain
snails, certain insects, and a very few others possess it. But the
shipworm makes little use of this difficult art, and feeds chiefly on
the rich plankton streaming through its body.

Other timbers on the beach bear the marks of the wood piddock. These are
shallow holes that penetrate only the outer portions just beneath the
bark, but they are broad and cleanly cylindrical. The boring piddock is
seeking only shelter and protection. Unlike the shipworm, it does not
digest the wood, but lives only on the plankton that it draws into its
body through a protruding siphon.

Empty piddock holes sometimes attract other lodgers, as abandoned birds’
nests may become homes for insects. On the muddy banks of salt creeks at
Bears Bluff in South Carolina, I have picked up timbers riddled with
holes. Once stout little white-shelled piddocks dwelt in them. The
piddocks were long since dead and even the shells were gone, but in each
hole was a dark glistening body like a raisin embedded in a cake. They
were the contracted tissues of small anemones, finding there, in this
world of silt-laden water and yielding mud, that bit of firm foundation
which anemones must have. Seeing anemones in such an improbable place,
one wonders how the larvae happened to be there, ready to seize the
chance opportunity presented by that timber with its neatly excavated
apartments; and one is struck anew by the enormous waste of life,
remembering that for each of these anemones that succeeded in finding a
home, many thousands must have failed.

Always, then, in this flotsam and jetsam of the tide lines, we are
reminded that a strange and different world lies offshore. Though what
we see here may be but the husks and fragments of life, through it we
are made aware of life and death, of movement and change, of the
transport of living things by ocean currents, by tides, by wind-driven
waves. Some of these involuntary migrants are adults. They may perish in
mid-journey; a few, being transported into a new home and finding there
conditions that are favorable, may survive, may even produce surviving
young to extend the range of the species. But many others are larvae,
and whether or not they will make a successful landing depends on many
things—on the length of their larval life (can they wait for a distant
landfall before they reach the stage when they must take up an adult
existence?)—on the temperature of the water they encounter—on the set
of the currents that may carry them to favoring shoals, or off into deep
water where they will be lost.

And so, walking the beach, we become aware of a most fascinating
problem—the colonization of the shore, and especially of those
“islands” of rock (or the semblance of rock) that occur in the midst of
a sea of sand. For whenever a seawall is built, or a jetty, or pilings
are sunk for a pier or a bridge, or rock, long hidden from sun and
buried even beneath the sea, emerges again on the ocean floor, these
hard surfaces immediately become peopled with typical animals of the
rocks. But how did the colonizing rock fauna happen to be at hand—here
in the midst of a sandy coast that stretches for hundreds of miles to
north and south?

Pondering the answer, we become aware of that ceaseless migration, for
the most part doomed to futility, yet ensuring that always, when
opportunity arises, Life shall be waiting, ready to take advantage. For
the ocean currents are not merely a movement of water; they are a stream
of life, carrying always the eggs and young of countless sea creatures.
They have carried the hardier ones across oceans, or step by step on
long coastwise journeys. They have carried some along deep, hidden
passageways where cold currents flow along the floor of the ocean. They
have brought inhabitants to populate new islands pushing above the
surface of the sea. These things they have done, we must suppose, since
first there was life in the sea.

And as long as the currents move on their courses there is the
possibility, the probability, even the certainty, that some particular
form of life will extend its range, will come to occupy new territory.

As almost nothing else does, this to me expresses the pressure of the
life force—the intense, blind, unconscious will to survive, to push on,
to expand. It is one of life’s mysteries that most of the participants
in this cosmic migration are doomed to failure; it is no less mysterious
that their failure turns into success when, for all the billions lost, a
few succeed.




                            The Coral Coast


I DOUBT that anyone can travel the length of the Florida Keys without
having communicated to his mind a sense of the uniqueness of this land
of sky and water and scattered mangrove-covered islands. The atmosphere
of the Keys is strongly and peculiarly their own. It may be that here,
more than in most places, remembrance of the past and intimations of the
future are linked with present reality. In bare and jaggedly corroded
rock, sculptured with the patterns of the corals, there is the
desolation of a dead past. In the multicolored sea gardens seen from a
boat as one drifts above them, there is a tropical lushness and mystery,
a throbbing sense of the pressure of life; in coral reef and mangrove
swamp there are the dimly seen foreshadowings of the future.

This world of the Keys has no counterpart elsewhere in the United
States, and indeed few coasts of the earth are like it. Offshore, living
coral reefs fringe the island chain, while some of the Keys themselves
are the dead remnants of an old reef whose builders lived and flourished
in a warm sea perhaps a thousand years ago. This is a coast not formed
of lifeless rock or sand, but created by the activities of living things
which, though having bodies formed of protoplasm even as our own, are
able to turn the substance of the sea into rock.

The living coral coasts of the world are confined to waters in which the
temperature seldom falls below 70° F. (and never for prolonged periods),
for the massive structures of the reefs can be built only where the
coral animals are bathed by waters warm enough to favor the secretion of
their calcareous skeletons. Reefs and all the associated structures of a
coral coast are therefore restricted to the area bounded by the Tropics
of Cancer and Capricorn. Moreover, they occur only on the eastern shores
of continents, where currents of tropical water are carried toward the
poles in a pattern determined by the earth’s rotation and the direction
of the winds. Western shores are inhospitable to corals because they are
the site of upwellings of deep, cold water, with cold coastwise currents
running toward the equator.

In North America, therefore, California and the Pacific coast of Mexico
lack corals, while the West Indian region supports them in profusion. So
do the coast of Brazil in South America, the tropical east African
coast, and the northeastern shores of Australia, where the Great Barrier
Reef creates a living wall for more than a thousand miles.

Within the United States the only coral coast is that of the Florida
Keys. For nearly 200 miles these islands reach southwestward into
tropical waters. They begin a little south of Miami where Sands,
Elliott, and Old Rhodes Keys mark the entrance to Biscayne Bay; then
other islands continue to the southwest, skirting the tip of the Florida
mainland, from which they are separated by Florida Bay, and finally
swinging out from the land to form a slender dividing line between the
Gulf of Mexico and the Straits of Florida, through which the Gulf Stream
pours its indigo flood.

To seaward of the Keys there is a shallow area three to seven miles wide
where the sea bottom forms a gently sloping platform under depths
generally less than five fathoms. An irregular channel (Hawk Channel)
with depths to ten fathoms traverses these shallows and is navigable by
small boats. A wall of living coral reefs forms the seaward boundary of
the reef platform, standing on the edge of the deeper sea (see page
198).

The Keys are divided into two groups that have a dual nature and origin.
The eastern islands, swinging in their smooth arc 110 miles from Sands
to Loggerhead Key, are the exposed remnants of a Pleistocene coral reef.
Its builders lived and flourished in a warm sea just before the last of
the glacial periods, but today the corals, or all that remains of them,
are dry land. These eastern Keys are long, narrow islands covered with
low trees and shrubs, bordered with coral limestone where they are
exposed to the open sea, passing into the shallow waters of Florida Bay
through a maze of mangrove swamps on the sheltered side. The western
group, known as the Pine Islands, are a different kind of land, formed
of limestone rock that had its origin on the bottom of a shallow
interglacial sea, and is now raised only slightly above the surface of
the water. But in all the Keys, whether built by the coral animals or
formed of solidifying sea drift, the shaping hand is the hand of the
sea.

In its being and its meaning, this coast represents not merely an uneasy
equilibrium of land and water masses; it is eloquent of a continuing
change now actually in progress, a change being brought about by the
life processes of living things. Perhaps the sense of this comes most
clearly to one standing on a bridge between the Keys, looking out over
miles of water, dotted with mangrove-covered islands to the horizon.
This may seem a dreamy land, steeped in its past. But under the bridge a
green mangrove seedling floats, long and slender, one end already
beginning to show the development of roots, beginning to reach down
through the water, ready to grasp and to root firmly in any muddy shoal
that may lie across its path. Over the years the mangroves bridge the
water gaps between the islands; they extend the mainland; they create
new islands. And the currents that stream under the bridge, carrying the
mangrove seedling, are one with the currents that carry plankton to the
coral animals building the offshore reef, creating a wall of rocklike
solidity, a wall that one day may be added to the mainland. So this
coast is built.

To understand the living present, and the promise of the future, it is
necessary to remember the past. During the Pleistocene, the earth
experienced at least four glacial stages, when severe climates prevailed
and immense sheets of ice crept southward. During each of these stages,
large volumes of the earth’s water were frozen into ice, and sea level
dropped all over the world. The glacial intervals were separated by
milder interglacial stages when, with water from melting glaciers
returning to the sea, the level of the world ocean rose again. Since the
most recent Ice Age, known as the Wisconsin, the general trend of the
earth’s climate has been toward a gradual, though not uniform warming
up. The interglacial stage preceding the Wisconsin glaciation is known
as the Sangamon, and with it the history of the Florida Keys is
intimately linked.

The corals that now form the substance of the eastern Keys built their
reef during that Sangamon interglacial period, probably only a few tens
of thousands of years ago. Then the sea stood perhaps 100 feet higher
than it does today, and covered all of the southern part of the Florida
plateau. In the warm sea off the sloping southeastern edge of that
plateau the corals began to grow, in water somewhat more than 100 feet
deep. Later the sea level dropped about 30 feet (this was in the early
stages of a new glaciation, when water drawn from the sea was falling as
snow in the far north); then another 30 feet. In this shallower water
the corals flourished even more luxuriantly and the reef grew upward,
its structure mounting close to the sea surface. But the dropping sea
level that at first favored the growth of the reef was to be its
destruction, for as the ice increased in the north in the Wisconsin
glacial stage, the ocean level fell so low that the reef was exposed and
all its living coral animals were killed. Once again in its history the
reef was submerged for a brief period, but this could not bring back the
life that had created it. Later it emerged again and has remained above
water, except for the lower portions, which now form the passes between
the Keys. Where the old reef lies exposed, it is deeply corroded and
dissected by the dissolving action of rain and the beating of salt
spray; in many places the old coral heads are revealed, so distinctly
that the species are identifiable.

While the reef was a living thing, being built up in that Sangamon sea,
the sediments that have more recently become the limestone of the
western group of Keys were accumulating on the landward side of the
reef. Then the nearest land lay 150 miles to the north, for all the
southern end of the present Florida peninsula was submerged. The remains
of many sea creatures, the solution of limestone rocks, and chemical
reactions in the sea water contributed to the soft ooze that covered the
shallow bottoms. With the changing sea levels that followed, this ooze
became compacted and solidified into a white, fine-textured limestone,
containing many small spherules of calcium carbonate resembling the roe
of fish; because of this characteristic it is sometimes known as
“oölitic limestone,” or “Miami oölite.” This is the rock immediately
underlying the southern part of the Florida mainland. It forms the bed
of Florida Bay under the layer of recent sediments, and then rises above
the surface in the Pine Islands, or western Keys, from Big Pine Key to
Key West. On the mainland, the cities of Palm Beach, Fort Lauderdale,
and Miami stand on a ridge of this limestone formed when currents swept
past an old shore line of the peninsula, molding the soft oozes into a
curving bar. The Miami oölite is exposed on the floor of the Everglades
as rock of strangely uneven surface, here rising in sharp peaks, there
dropping away in solution holes. Builders of the Tamiami Trail and of
the highway from Miami to Key Largo dredged up this limestone along the
rights of way and with it built the foundations on which these highways
are laid.

Knowing this past, we can see in the present a repetition of the
pattern, a recurrence of earth processes of an earlier day. Now, as
then, living reefs are building up offshore; sediments are accumulating
in shallow waters; and the level of the sea, almost imperceptibly but
certainly, is changing.

Off this coral coast the sea lies green in the shallows, blue in the far
distances. After a storm, or even after a prolonged southeasterly blow,
comes “white water.” Then a thick, milk-white, richly calcareous
sediment is washed out of the reefs and stirred from its deep beds over
the floor of the reef flat. On such days the diving mask and the
aqualung may as well be left behind, for the underwater visibility is
little better than in a London fog.

“White water” is the indirect result of the very high rate of
sedimentation that prevails in the shallows around the Keys. Anyone who
wades out even a few steps from the shore notices the white, siltlike
substance adrift in the water and accumulating on the bottom. It has
visibly rained down on every surface. Its fine dust lies over sponge and
gorgonian and anemone; it chokes and buries the low-growing algae and
lies whitely over the dark bulks of the big loggerhead sponges. The
wader stirs up clouds of it; winds and strong currents set it in motion.
Its accumulation is going on at an astonishing rate; sometimes, after a
storm, two or three inches of new sediment are deposited from one high
tide to the next. It comes from various sources. Some is mechanically
derived from the disintegration of dead plants and animals—mollusk
shells, lime-depositing algae, coral skeletons, tubes of worms or
snails, spicules of gorgonians and sponges, skeletal plates of
holothurians. It is also derived in part from chemical precipitation of
the calcium carbonate present in the water. This, in turn, has been
leached out of the vast expanses of limestone rock that compose the
surface of southern Florida, and has been carried to the sea by rivers
and by the slow drainage of the Everglades.

A few miles outside the chain of the present Keys is the reef of living
coral, forming the seaward rim of the shallows, and overlooking a steep
descent into the trough of the Florida straits. The reefs extend from
Fowey Rocks, south of Miami, to the Marquesas and Tortugas and in
general they mark the 10-fathom depth contour. But often they rise to
lesser depths and here and there they break the surface as tiny offshore
islands, many of them marked by lighthouses.

Drifting over the reef in a small boat and peering down through a
glass-bottomed bucket, one finds it hard to visualize the whole terrain,
for so little of it can be seen at a time. Even a diver exploring more
intimately finds it difficult to realize he is on the crest of a high
hill, swept by currents instead of winds, where gorgonians are the
shrubbery and stands of elkhorn coral are trees of stone. Toward the
land, the sea floor slopes gently down from this hilltop into the wide
water-filled valley of Hawk Channel; then it rises again and breaks
water as a chain of low-lying islands—the Keys. But on the seaward side
of the reef the bottom descends quickly into blue depths. Live corals
grow down to a depth of about 10 fathoms. Below that it is too dark,
perhaps, or there is too much sediment, and instead of living coral
there is a foundation of dead reef, formed at some time when the sea
level was lower than it is today. Out where the water is about 100
fathoms deep there is a clean rock bottom, the Pourtalès Plateau; its
fauna is rich, but the corals that live here are not reef builders.
Between 300 and 500 fathoms sediments have again accumulated on a slope
that descends to the trough of the Florida straits—the channel of the
Gulf Stream.

As for the reef itself, many thousand thousand beings—plant and animal,
living and dead—have entered into its composition. Corals of many
species, building their little cups of lime and with them fashioning
many strange and beautiful forms, are the foundation of the reef. But
besides the corals there are other builders and all the interstices of
the reef are filled with their shells or their limy tubes, or with coral
rock cemented together with building stones of the most diverse origin.
There are colonies of tube-building worms and there are mollusks of the
snail tribe whose contorted, tubular shells may be intertwined into
massive structures. Calcareous algae, which have the property of
depositing lime in their living tissues, form part of the reef itself
or, growing abundantly over the shallows on the landward side, add their
substance at death to the coral sand of which limestone rock is later
formed. The horny corals or gorgonians, known as sea fans and sea whips,
all contain limestone spicules in their soft tissues. These, along with
lime from starfish and sea urchins and sponges and an immense number of
smaller creatures, will eventually, with the passage of time and through
the chemistry of the sea, come to form part of the reef.

Along with those that build are others that destroy. The sulphur sponge
dissolves away the calcareous rock. Boring mollusks riddle it with their
tunnels, and worms with sharp, biting jaws eat into it, weakening its
structure and so hastening the day when a mass of coral will yield to
the force of the waves, will break away, and perhaps roll down the
seaward face of the reef into deeper water.

The basis of this whole complex association is a minute creature of
deceptively simple appearance, the coral polyp. The coral animal is
formed on the same general lines as the sea anemone. It is a
double-walled tube of cylindrical shape, closed at the base and open at
the free end, where a crown of tentacles surrounds the mouth. The
important difference—the fact on which the existence of coral reefs
depends—is this: the coral polyp has the ability to secrete lime,
forming a hard cup about itself. This is done by cells of the outer
layer, much as the shell of a mollusk is secreted by an outer layer of
soft tissue—the mantle. So the anemone-like coral polyp comes to sit in
a compartment formed of a substance as hard as rock. Because the “skin”
of the polyp is turned inward at intervals in a series of vertical
folds, and because all of this skin is actively secreting lime, the cup
does not have a smooth circumference, but is marked by partitions
projecting inward, forming the starlike or flowerlike pattern familiar
to anyone who has examined a coral skeleton.

Most corals build colonies of many individuals. All the individuals of
any one colony, however, are derived from a single fertilized ovum that
matured and then began to form new polyps by budding. The colony has a
shape characteristic of the species—branched, boulderlike, flatly
encrusting, or cup-shaped. Its core is solid, for only the surface is
occupied by living polyps, which may be widely separated in some species
or closely crowded in others. It is often true that the larger and more
massive the colony, the smaller the individuals that compose it; the
polyps of a branching coral taller than a man may themselves be only an
eighth of an inch high.

The hard substance of the coral colony is usually white, but may take on
the colors of minute plant cells that live within the soft tissues in a
relation of mutual benefit. There is the exchange usual in such
relations, the plants getting carbon dioxide and the animals making use
of the oxygen given off by the plants. This particular association may
have a deeper significance, however. The yellow, green, or brown
pigments of the algae belong to the group of chemical substances known
as carotinoids. Recent studies suggest that these pigments in the
imprisoned algae may act on the corals, serving as “internal
correlators” to influence the processes of reproduction. Under normal
conditions, the presence of the algae seems to benefit the coral, but in
dim light the coral animals rid themselves of the algae by excreting
them. Perhaps this means that in weak light or in darkness the whole
physiology of the plant is changed and the products of its metabolism
are altered to something harmful, so that the animal must expel the
plant guest.

Within the coral community there are other strange associations. In the
Florida Keys and elsewhere in the West Indian region, a gall crab makes
an oven-shaped cavity on the upper surface of a colony of living brain
coral. As the coral grows the crab manages to keep open a semicircular
entrance through which, while young, it enters and leaves its den. Once
full grown, however, the crab is believed to be imprisoned within the
coral. Few details of the existence of this Florida gall crab are known,
but in a related species in corals of the Great Barrier Reef only the
females form galls. The males are minute, and apparently visit the
females in the cavities where they are imprisoned. The female of this
species depends on straining food organisms from indrawn currents of sea
water and its digestive apparatus and appendages are much modified.

Everywhere, throughout the whole structure of the reef as well as
inshore, the horny corals or gorgonians are abundant, sometimes
outnumbering the corals. The violet-hued sea fan spreads its lace to the
passing currents, and from all the structure of the fan innumerable
mouths protrude through tiny pores, and tentacles reach out into the
water to capture food. The little snail known as the flamingo-tongue,
wearing a solid and highly polished shell, often lives on the sea fans.
The soft mantle, extended to cover the shell, is a pale flesh color with
numerous black, roughly triangular markings. The gorgonians known as sea
whips are more abundant, forming dense stands of undersea shrubbery,
often waist-high, sometimes as tall as a man. Lilac, purple, yellow,
orange, brown, and buff are the colors worn by these gorgonians of the
coral reefs.

Encrusting sponges spread their mats of yellow, green, purple, and red
over the walls of the reef; exotic mollusks like the jewel box and the
spiny oyster cling to it; long-spined sea urchins make dark, bristling
patches in the hollows and crevices; and schools of brightly colored
fishes twinkle along the façade of the reef where the lone hunters, the
gray snapper and the barracuda, wait to seize them.

At night the reef comes alive. From every stony branch and tower and
domed façade, the little coral animals, who, avoiding daylight, had
remained shrunken within their protective cups until darkness fell, now
thrust out their tentacled heads and feed on the plankton that is rising
toward the surface. Small crustacea and many other forms of
microplankton, drifting or swimming against a branch of coral, are
instant victims of the myriad stinging cells with which each tentacle is
armed. Minute though the individual plankton animals be, the chances of
passing unharmed through the interlacing branches of a stand of elkhorn
coral seem slender indeed.

Other creatures of the reef respond to night and darkness and many of
them emerge from the grottoes and crevices that served as daytime
shelter. Even that strange hidden fauna of the massive sponges—the
small shrimps and amphipods and other animals that live as unbidden
guests deep within the canals of the sponge—at night creep up along
those dark and narrow galleries and collect near their thresholds as
though looking out upon the world of the reef.

On certain nights of the year, extraordinary events occur over the
reefs. The famed palolo worm of the South Pacific, moved to gather in
its prodigious spawning swarms on a certain moon of a certain month—and
then only—has its less-known counterpart in a related worm that lives
in the reefs of the West Indies and at least locally in the Florida
Keys. The spawning of this Atlantic palolo has been observed repeatedly
about the Dry Tortugas reefs, at Cape Florida, and in several West
Indian localities. At Tortugas it takes place always in July, usually
when the moon reaches its third quarter, though less often on the first
quarter. The worms never spawn on the new moon.

The palolo inhabits burrows in dead coral rock, sometimes appropriating
the tunnelings of other creatures, sometimes excavating its burrow by
biting away fragments of rock. The life of this strange little creature
seems to be ruled by light. In its immaturity the palolo is repelled by
light—by sunlight, by the light of the full moon, even by paler
moonlight. Only in the darkest hours of the night, when this strong
inhibition of the light rays is removed, does it venture from its
burrow, creeping out a few inches in order to nibble at the vegetation
on the rocks. Then, as the season for spawning approaches, remarkable
changes take place within the bodies of the worms. With the maturing of
the sex cells, the segments of the posterior third of each animal take
on a new color, deep pink in the males, greenish gray in the females.
Moreover, this part of the body, distended with eggs or sperm, becomes
exceedingly thin-walled and fragile, and a noticeable constriction
develops between this and the anterior part of the worm.

At last there comes a night when these worms—so changed in their
physical beings—respond in a new way to the light of the moon. No
longer does the light repel and hold them prisoners within their
burrows. Instead, it draws them out to the performance of a strange
ritual. The worms back out of their burrows, thrusting out the swollen,
thin-walled posterior ends, which immediately begin a series of twisting
movements, writhing in spiral motions until suddenly the body breaks at
the weak point and each worm becomes two. The two parts have different
destinies—the one to remain behind in the burrow and resume the life of
the timid forager of the dark hours, the other to swim up toward the
surface of the sea, to become one of a vast swarm of thousands upon
thousands of worms joining in the spawning activities of the species.

During the last hours of the night the number of swarming worms
increases rapidly, and when dawn comes the sea over the reef is almost
literally filled with them. When the first rays of the sun appear, the
worms, strongly stimulated by the light, begin to twist and contract
violently, their thin-walled bodies burst open, and the eggs from some
and sperm from others are cast into the sea. The spent and empty worms
may continue to swim weakly for a short time, preyed upon by fish that
gather for a feast, but soon all that remain have sunk to the bottom and
died. But floating at the surface of the sea are the fertilized eggs,
drifting over areas many feet deep and acres in extent. Within them
swift changes have begun—the division of cells, the differentiation of
structure. By evening of that same day the eggs have yielded up tiny
larvae, swimming with spiral motions through the sea. For about three
days the larvae live at the surface; then they become burrowers in the
reefs below until, a year hence, they will repeat the spawning behavior
of their kind.

Some related worms that swarm periodically about the Keys and the West
Indies are luminous, creating beautiful pyrotechnic displays on dark
nights. Some people believe that the mysterious light reported by
Columbus as seen by him on the night of October 11, “about four hours
before making the landfall and an hour before moonrise,” may have been a
display of some of these “fireworms.”

The tides pouring in from the reefs and sweeping over the flats come to
rest against the elevated coral rock of the shore. On some of the Keys
the rock is smoothly weathered, with flattened surfaces and rounded
contours, but on many others the erosive action of the sea has produced
a rough and deeply pitted surface, reflecting the solvent action of
centuries of waves and driven salt spray. It is almost like a stormy sea
frozen into solidity, or as the surface of the moon might be. Little
caves and solution holes extend above and below the line of the high
tide. In such a place I am always strongly aware of the old, dead reef
beneath my feet, and of the corals whose patterns, now crumbling and
blurred, were once the delicately sculptured vessels that held the
living creatures. All the builders now are dead—they have been dead for
thousands of years—but that which they created remains, a part of the
living present.

Crouching on the jagged rocks, I hear little murmurings and whisperings
born of the movements of air and water over these surfaces—the audible
voice of this nonhuman, intertidal world. There are few obvious signs of
life to break the spell of brooding desolation. Perhaps a dark-bodied
isopod—a sea roach—darts across the dry rock to disappear into one of
the small sea caves, daring exposure to light and to sharp-eyed enemies
only for the moment of its swift passage from one dark recess to
another. There are thousands of its kind in the coral rock, but not
until darkness covers the shore will they come out in numbers to search
for the bits of animal and vegetable refuse that are their food.

At the high tide line, growths of microscopic plants darken the coral
rock, tracing that mysterious black line that marks the sea’s edge on
all rocky coasts of the world. Because of the irregular surface and deep
dissection of the coral rock, the sea runs in under the high tide rocks
by way of crevices and depressions, and so the black zone darkens the
jagged peaks and the rims of holes and little caves, while lighter rock
of a yellowish-gray hue lines the depressions below that controlling
tidal level.

Small snails whose shells are boldly striped or checked in black and
white—the neritas—crowd down into cracks and cavities in the coral or
rest on open rock surfaces waiting for the return of the tide when they
can feed. Others, in rounded shells with roughly beaded surfaces, belong
to the periwinkle tribe. Like many others of their kind, these beaded
periwinkles are making a tentative invasion of the land, living under
rocks or logs high on the shore or even entering the fringe of land
vegetation. Black horn shells live in numbers just below the line of the
high tides, feeding on the algal film over the rocks. The living snails
are held by some intangible bonds to this tidal level, but the shells
discarded after their death are found and taken as habitations by the
smallest of the hermit crabs, who then carry them down onto the lower
levels of the shore.

These deeply eroded rocks are the home of the chitons, whose primitive
form harks back to some ancient group of mollusks of which they are the
only living representatives. Their oval bodies, covered with a jointed
shell of eight transverse plates, fit into depressions in the rocks when
the tide is out. They grip the rocks so strongly that even heavy waves
can get no hold on their sloping contours. When the high tide covers
them, they begin to creep about, resuming their rasping of vegetation
from the rocks, their bodies swaying to and fro in time to the scraping
motions of the radula or file-like tongue. Month in and month out, a
chiton moves only a few feet in any direction; because of this sedentary
habit, the spores of algae and the larvae of barnacles and tube-building
worms settle upon its shell and develop there. Sometimes, in dark wet
caves, the chitons pile up, one on top of another, and each scrapes
algae off the back of the one beneath it. In a small way these primitive
mollusks may be an agent of geologic change as they feed on the rocks,
each removing, along with the algae, minute scrapings of rock particles
and so, over the centuries and the millennia in which this ancient race
of beings has lived its simple life, contributing to the processes of
erosion by which earth surfaces are worn away.

On some of these Keys a small intertidal mollusk called Onchidium lives
deep in little rock caverns, the entrances of which are often overgrown
by colonies of mussels. Although it is a mollusk and a snail, Onchidium
has no shell. It belongs to a group that consists largely of land snails
or slugs, in many of which the shell is lacking or concealed. Onchidium
inhabits tropical seashores, living usually on beaches of roughly eroded
rock. As the tide falls, processions of small black slugs emerge from
their doorways, wriggling and pushing their way out through the impeding
mussel threads, a dozen or more individuals coming out of a common cave
to feed on the rocks, from which they scrape vegetation as the chitons
do. As they emerge, each is invested with a tunic of slime that makes it
look jet black, wet, and shining; in wind and sun the little slug dries
to a deep blue-black over which is a slight, milky bloom.

On these journeys the slugs seem to follow haphazard or irregular paths
over the rocks. They continue feeding as the tide falls to its lowest
ebb, and even as it turns and begins to rise. About half an hour before
the returning sea has reached them, and before so much as a drop of
water has splashed into their nests, all of the slugs cease their
grazing and begin to return to the home nest. While the outgoing path
was meandering, the return is by a direct route. The members of each
community return to their own nest, even though the way may lie over
greatly eroded rock surfaces and even though the path may cross the
routes of other slugs returning to other nests. All of the individuals
belonging to one nest-community, even though they may have been widely
separated while feeding, begin the return journey at almost the same
moment. What is the stimulus? It is not the returning water, for that
has not touched them; when it laps again over their rocks they will be
safe within their nests.

The whole pattern of behavior of this little creature is puzzling. Why
should it be drawn to live again at the edge of the sea that its
ancestors deserted thousands or millions of years ago? It comes forth
only when the tide has fallen, then, somehow sensing the impending
return of the sea and seeming to remember its recent affinities with the
land, it hurries to safety before the tide can find it and carry it
away. How has it acquired this behavior, attracted yet repelled by the
sea? We can only ask these questions; we cannot answer them.

For its protection during the feeding journeys, Onchidium is equipped
with means of detecting and driving away its enemies. Minute papillae on
its back are sensitive to light and passing shadows. Other, stouter
papillae associated with the mantle are equipped with glands that
secrete a milky, highly acid fluid. If the animal is suddenly disturbed,
it expels spurting streams of this acid, the streams breaking up in the
air to a fine spray that may be thrown five or six inches, or as much as
a dozen times the length of the animal. The old German zoologist Semper,
who studied a species of Onchidium in the Philippines, believed this
dual equipment served to protect the slug from the beach-hopping blenny,
a fish of many tropical mangrove coasts that leaps along above the tide,
feeding on Onchidium and crabs. Semper thought the slugs could detect
the shadow of an approaching fish and drive off the enemy by discharging
the white acid spray. In Florida or elsewhere in the West Indian region
there is no fish that comes out of water to pursue its prey. On the
rocks where Onchidium must feed there are, however, scrambling crabs and
isopods whose jostlings might well push the slugs into the water, for
they have no means of gripping the rocks. For whatever reason, the slugs
react to the crabs and to the isopods as to dangerous enemies,
responding to their touch by discharging the repellant chemical.

In the strip between tropical tide lines, conditions are difficult for
nearly all forms of life. The heat of the sun increases the hazards of
exposure during the withdrawal of the tide. The shifting layers of
choking sediment, accumulating on flat or gently sloping surfaces,
discourage many plants and animals of types that inhabit rocky shores in
the clearer, cooler waters of the north. Instead of the vast barnacle
and mussel fields of New England there are only scattering patches of
these creatures, varying from Key to Key but never really abundant.
Instead of the great rockweed forests of the north, there are only
scattered growths of small algae, including various brittle,
lime-secreting forms, none of which offer shelter or security to any
considerable number of animals.

If the area marked out by the advance and retreat of the neap tides is
in general inhospitable, there are nevertheless two forms of life—one
plant, one animal—that are thoroughly at home there, and live in
profusion nowhere else. The plant is a peculiarly beautiful alga that
resembles spheres of green glass clustered together in irregular masses.
It is Valonia, the sea bottle, a green alga that forms large vesicles
filled with a sap that bears a definite chemical relation to the water
about it, varying the proportions of its contained ions of sodium and
potassium according to variations in the intensity of sunlight, the
exposure to surf, and other conditions of its world. Under overhanging
rock and in other sheltered places it forms sheets and masses of its
emerald globules, lying half buried in deep drifts of sediment.

The animal symbol of this intertidal world of coral is a group of snails
whose whole structure and being represent an extraordinary contrast to
the way of life typical of this class of mollusks. They are called the
vermetid or “wormlike” snails. The shell is no ordinary gastropod spire
or cone, but a loose uncoiled tube very like the calcareous tubes built
by many worms. The species that inhabit this intertidal zone have become
colonial, and their tubes form closely packed and intertwined masses.

The very nature of these vermetid snails and their departure from the
form and habits of related mollusks are eloquent of the circumstances of
their world and of the readiness of life to adapt itself to a vacant
niche. Here on this coral platform the tide ebbs and flows twice daily,
and each flood brings renewed food supplies from offshore. There is but
one perfect way to exploit such rich supplies: to remain in one place
and fish the currents as they stream by. This is done on other shores by
such animals as the barnacles, the mussels, and the tube-building worms.
It is not ordinarily a snail’s way of life, but in adaptation these
extraordinary snails have become sedentary, abandoning the typical
roaming habit. No longer solitary, they have become gregarious to an
extreme degree, living in crowded colonies, with shells so intertwined
that early geologists called their formations “worm rock.” And they have
given up the snail habits of scraping food from the rocks or of hunting
and devouring other animals of large size; instead they draw the sea
water into their bodies and strain out the minute planktonic food
organisms. The tips of their gills are thrust out and drawn through the
water like nets—an adaptation probably unique in all the group of
snail-like mollusks. The vermetids give their own clear demonstration of
the plasticity of the living organism and its responsiveness to the
world about it. Again and again, in group after group of widely
different and unrelated animals, the same problem has been met and
solved by the evolution of diverse structures that function for a common
purpose. So the legions of the barnacles sweep food from the tides on a
New England shore, using a modification of what in their relatives would
be a swimming appendage; mole crabs gather by the thousand where surf
sweeps the southern beaches, straining out food with the bristles of
their antennae; and here on this coral shore the crowded masses of this
strange snail filter the waters of the incoming tide through their
gills. By becoming the imperfect, the atypical snail, they have become
the perfectly adapted exploiter of the opportunities of their world.

The edge of the low tide is a dark line traced by colonies of
short-spined, rock-boring sea urchins. Every hole and every depression
in the coral rock bristles with their small dark bodies. One spot in the
Keys lives in my memory as an urchin paradise. This is the seaward shore
of one of the eastern group of islands, where the rock drops in an
abrupt terrace, somewhat undercut and deeply eroded into holes and small
caves, many with their roofs open to the sky. I have stood on the dry
rock above the tide and looked down into these little water-floored,
rock-walled grottoes, finding twenty-five to thirty urchins in one of
these caverns that was no larger than a bushel basket. The caves shine
with a green water-light in the sun, and in this light the globular
bodies of the urchins have a reddish color of glowing, luminous quality,
in rich contrast to the black spines.

A little beyond this spot the sea bottom slopes under water more
gradually, with no undercutting. Here the rock borers seem to have taken
over every niche that can afford shelter; they give the illusion of
shadows beside each small irregularity of bottom. It is not certain
whether they use the five short stout teeth on their under surfaces to
scrape out holes in the rock, or perhaps merely take advantage of
natural depressions to find a safe anchorage against the occasional
storms that sweep this coast. For some inscrutable reason, these
rock-boring urchins and related species in other parts of the world are
bound to this particular tidal level, linked to it precisely and
mysteriously by invisible ties that prevent their wandering farther out
over the reef flat, although other species of urchins are abundant
there.

Above and below the zone of the rock-boring urchins, closely crowded
throngs of pale brown tubular creatures push up through the chalky
sediment. When the tide leaves them their tissues retract and all that
proclaims them to be animals is hidden; then one might pass them by as
some strange marine fungi. With the return of the water their animal
nature is revealed, and from each fawn-colored tube a crown of
tentacles, of purest emerald green, is unfolded as each of these
anemone-like creatures begins to search the tide for the food it has
brought. Living where their very existence depends on keeping the
delicate tissues of the tentacles above the choking dust of sediment,
these zoanthids are able to stretch their bodies into slender threads
where the sediments are deep, though normally their tubes are short and
stout.

On the seaward side of many of the Keys the bottom slopes gently, with
wading depths for perhaps a quarter of a mile or more. Once beyond the
rock-boring sea urchins, the vermetid snails, and the green and brown
jewel anemones, the bottom of coarse sand and coral fragments begins to
be marked by dark patches of turtle grass, and larger animals begin to
inhabit the reef flats. Sponges, dark and bulky, grow in water only deep
enough to cover their massive forms. Small, shallow-water corals,
somehow able to survive the rain of sediments that would be fatal to the
larger reef-builders, erect their hard structures, stoutly branched or
domed, on the floor of coral rock. The gorgonians, plantlike in their
habit of growth, are a low shrubbery of delicate rose and brown and
purple hues. And within and among and beneath them all is the infinitely
varied fauna of a tropical coast, as many creatures that wander freely
through the waters of this warm sea crawl or swim or glide over the
flats.

Massive and inert, the loggerhead sponges by their appearance suggest
nothing of the activity that goes on within their dark bulks. There is
no sign of life for the casual passer-by to read, although if he waited
and watched long enough he might sometimes see the deliberate closing of
some of the round openings, large enough to admit an exploring finger,
that penetrate the flat upper surface. These and other openings are the
key to the nature of the giant sponge which, like even the smallest of
its group, can exist only as long as it can keep the waters of the sea
circulating through its body. Its vertical walls are pierced by intake
canals of small diameter, groups of them covered by sieve plates with
numerous perforations. From these the canals lead almost horizontally
into the interior of the sponge, branching and rebranching into tubes of
progressively smaller bore, to penetrate all the massive bulk of the
sponge and finally to lead up to the large exit canals. Perhaps these
exit holes are kept free of choking sediment by the strength of the
outbound currents; at any rate they are the only part of the sponge that
shows a pure black color, for the flour-like whiteness of the reef
sediments has been sifted over all the sooty black surface of the body.

In its passage through the sponge, the water leaves a coating of minute
food organisms and organic detritus on the walls of the canals; the
cells of the sponge pick up the food, pass the digestible materials
along from cell to cell, and return waste material to the flowing
currents. Oxygen passes into the sponge cells; carbon dioxide is given
off. And sometimes small sponge larvae, having undergone the early
stages of their development within the parent sponge, detach themselves
and enter the dark flowing river, to pass with it into the sea.

The intricate passageways, the shelter and available food they offer,
have attracted many small creatures to live within the sponge. Some come
and go; others never leave the sponge once they have taken up residence
within it. One such permanent lodger is a small shrimp—one of the group
known as snapping shrimp because of the sound made by snapping the large
claw. Although the adults are imprisoned, the young shrimp, hatched from
eggs adhering to the appendages of their mothers, pass out with the
water currents into the sea and live for a time in the currents and
tides, drifting, swimming, perhaps carried far afield. By mischance they
may occasionally find their way into deep water where no sponges grow.
But many of the young shrimp will in time find and approach the dark
bulk of some loggerhead sponge and, entering it, will take up the
strange life of their parents. Wandering through its dark halls, they
scrape food from the walls of the sponge. As they creep along these
cylindrical passageways, they carry their antennae and their large claws
extended before them, as though to sense the approach of a larger and
possibly dangerous creature, for the sponge has many lodgers of many
species—other shrimps, amphipods, worms, isopods—and their numbers may
reach into the thousands if the sponge is large.

There, on the flats off some of the Keys, I have opened small
loggerheads and heard the warning snapping of claws as the resident
shrimps, small, amber-colored beings, hurried into the deeper cavities.
I had heard the same sound filling the air about me, as, on an evening
low tide, I waded in to the shore. From all the exposed reef rock there
were strange little knockings and hammerings, yet the sounds, to a
maddening degree, were impossible to locate. Surely this nearby
hammering came from this particular bit of rock; yet when I knelt to
examine it closely there was silence; then from all around, from
everywhere but this bit of rock at hand, all the elfin hammering was
resumed. I could never find the little shrimps in the rocks, yet I knew
they were related to those I had seen in the loggerhead sponges. Each
has one immense hammer claw almost as long as the rest of its body. The
movable finger of the claw bears a peg that fits into a socket in the
rigid finger. Apparently the movable finger, when raised, is held in
position by suction. To lower it, extra muscular force must be applied,
and when the suction is overcome, it snaps into place with audible
sound, at the same time ejecting a spurt of water from its socket.
Perhaps the water jet repels enemies and aids in capturing prey, which
may also be stunned by a blow from the forcibly retracted claw. Whatever
the value of the mechanism, the snapping shrimps are so abundant in the
shallows of tropical and subtropical regions, and snap their claws so
incessantly, that they are responsible for much of the extraneous noise
picked up on underwater listening devices, filling the water world with
a continuous sizzling, crackling sound.

It was on the reef flats off Ohio Key, on a day early in May, that I had
my first, startled encounter with tropical sea hares. I was wading over
a part of the flat that had an unusually heavy growth of rather tall
seaweeds when sudden movement drew my eyes to several heavy-bodied,
foot-long animals moving among the weeds. They were a pale tan color,
marked with black rings, and when I touched one cautiously with my foot,
it responded instantly by expelling a concealing cloud of fluid the
color of cranberry juice.

I had met my first sea hare years before on the North Carolina coast. It
was a small creature about as long as my little finger, browsing
peacefully among some seaweeds near a stone jetty. I slipped my hand
under it and gently brought it toward me, then, its identity confirmed,
I returned the little creature carefully to the algae, where it resumed
its grazing. Only by drastic revision of my mental image could I accept
these tropical creatures, which seemed to belong in some book of
mythology, as relatives of that first little elfin being.

The large West Indian sea hares inhabit the Florida Keys as well as the
Bahamas, Bermuda, and the Cape Verde Islands. Within their range they
usually live offshore, but at the spawning season they move in to the
shallows, where I had found them, to attach their eggs, in tangled
threads, to the weeds near the low tide mark. They are marine snails of
a sort, but have lost their external shells and possess only an internal
remnant, hidden by the soft mantle tissue. Two prominent tentacles
suggestive of ears, and the rabbit-like body shape, are responsible for
the common name (see page 235).

Whether because of its strange appearance, or because of its defensive
fluids, often thought to be poisonous, the Old World sea hare has long
had a secure place in folk lore, superstition, and witchcraft. Pliny
declared it was poisonous to the touch, and recommended as an antidote
asses’ milk and ground asses’ bones, boiled together. Apuleius, known
chiefly as the author of _The Golden Ass_, became curious about the
internal anatomy of the sea hare and persuaded two fishermen to bring
him a specimen; whereupon he was accused of witchcraft and poisoning.
Some fifteen centuries were to pass before anyone else ventured to
publish a description of the internal anatomy of the creature—then Redi
in 1684 described it, and although popular belief called it sometimes a
worm, sometimes a holothurian, sometimes a fish, he placed it correctly,
at least as to general relationships, as a marine slug. For the past
century or more the harmless nature of the sea hares has been recognized
for the most part, but although they are fairly well known in Europe and
Great Britain, the American sea hares, largely confined to tropical
waters, are less familiar animals.

Perhaps this anonymity is due in part to the infrequency of their
spawning migrations into tidal waters. An individual animal is both male
and female; it may function as either sex, or as both. In laying its
eggs, the sea hare extrudes a long thread in little spurts, about an
inch at a time, continuing the slow process until the string has reached
a length sometimes as great as 65 feet, and contains about 100,000 eggs.
As the pink or orange-colored thread is expelled it curls about the
surrounding vegetation, forming a tangled mass of spawn. The eggs and
the resulting young meet the common fate of marine creatures; many eggs
are destroyed, being eaten by crustacea or other predators (even by
their own kind), and many of the hatching larvae fail to survive the
dangers of life in the plankton. In the drift of the currents the larvae
are carried offshore, and when they undergo metamorphosis to the adult
form and seek the bottom they are in deep water. Their color changes
with changing food as they migrate shoreward: first they are a deep rose
color, then they are brown, then olive-green like the adults. For one of
the European species, at least, the known life history suggests a
curious parallel with that of the Pacific salmon. With maturity, the sea
hares turn shoreward to spawn. It is a journey from which there is no
return; they do not reappear on the offshore feeding grounds, but
apparently die after this single spawning.

The world of the reef flats is inhabited by echinoderms of every sort:
starfishes, brittle stars, sea urchins, sand dollars, and holothurians
all are at home on the coral rock, in the shifting coral sands, among
the gorgonian sea gardens and the grass-carpeted bottoms. All are
important in the economy of the marine world—as links in the living
chains by which materials are taken from the sea, passed from one to
another, returned to the sea, borrowed again. Some are important also in
the geologic processes of earth building and earth destruction—the
processes by which rock is worn away and ground to sand, by which the
sediments that carpet the sea floor are accumulated, shifted, sorted,
and distributed. And at death their hard skeletons contribute calcium
for the needs of other animals or for the building of the reefs.

Out on the reefs the long-spined black sea urchin excavates cavities
along the base of the coral wall; each sinks into its depression and
turns its spines outward, so that a swimmer moving along the reef sees
forests of black quills. This urchin also wanders in over the reef
flats, where it nestles close to the base of a loggerhead sponge, or
sometimes, apparently finding no need of concealment, rests in open,
sand-floored areas.

A full-grown black urchin may have a body or test nearly 4 inches in
diameter, with spines 12 to 15 inches long. This is one of the
comparatively few shore animals that are poisonous to the touch, and the
effect of contact with one of the slender, hollow spines is said to be
like that of a hornet sting, or may even be more serious for a child or
an especially susceptible adult. Apparently the mucous coating of the
spines bears the irritant or poison.

This urchin is extraordinary in the degree of its awareness of the
surroundings. A hand extended over it will cause all the spines to
swivel about on their mountings, pointing menacingly at the intruding
object. If the hand is moved from side to side the spines swing about,
following it. According to Professor Norman Millott of the University
College of the West Indies, nerve receptors scattered widely over the
body receive the message conveyed by a change in the intensity of light,
responding most sharply to suddenly decreased light as a shadowy portent
of danger. To this extent, then, the urchin may actually “see” moving
objects passing nearby.

Linked in some mysterious way with one of the great rhythms of nature,
this sea urchin spawns at the time of the full moon. The eggs and sperm
are shed into the water once in each lunar month during the summer
season, on the nights of strongest moonlight. Whatever the stimulus to
which all the individuals of the species respond, it assures that
prodigal and simultaneous release of reproductive cells that nature
often demands for the perpetuation of a species.

Off some of the Keys, in shallow water, lives the so-called slate-pencil
urchin, named for its short stout spines. This is an urchin of solitary
habit, single individuals sheltering under or among the reef rocks near
the low tide level. It seems a sluggish creature of dull perceptions,
unaware of the presence of an intruder, and making no effort to cling by
means of its tube feet when it is picked up. It belongs to the only
family of modern echinoderms that also existed in Paleozoic time; the
recent members of the group show little change from the form of
ancestors that lived hundreds of millions of years ago.

Another urchin with short and slender spines and color variations
ranging from deep violet to green, rose, or white, sometimes occurs
abundantly on sandy bottoms carpeted with turtle grass, camouflaging
itself with bits of grass and shell and coral fragments held in its tube
feet. Like many other urchins, it performs a geologic function. Nibbling
away at shells and coral rock with its white teeth, it chips off
fragments that are then passed through the grinding mill of its
digestive tract; these organic fragments, trimmed, ground, and polished
within the urchins, contribute to the sands of tropical beaches.

And the tribes of the starfish and the brittle stars are everywhere
represented on these coral flats. The great sea star, Oreaster, stout
and powerful of body, perhaps lives more abundantly a little offshore,
where whole constellations of them gather on the white sand. But
solitary specimens wander inshore, seeking especially the grassy areas.

A small reddish-brown starfish, Linkia, has the strange habit of
breaking off an arm, which then grows a cluster of four new arms that
are temporarily in a “comet” form. Sometimes the animal breaks across
the central disc; regeneration may result in six- or seven-rayed
animals. These divisions seem to be a method of reproduction practiced
by the young, for adult animals cease to fragment and produce eggs.

About the bases of gorgonians, under and inside of sponges, under
movable rocks and down in little, eroded caverns in the coral rock live
the brittle stars. With their long and flexible arms, each composed of a
series of “vertebrae” shaped like hourglasses, they are capable of
sinuous and graceful motion. Sometimes they stand on the tips of two
arms and sway in the motion of the water currents, bending the other
arms in movements as graceful as those of a ballet dancer. They creep
over the substratum by throwing two of their arms forward and pulling up
the body or disc and the remaining arms. The brittle stars feed on
minute mollusks and worms and other small animals. In turn, they are
eaten by many fish and other predators, and sometimes fall victims to
certain parasites. A small green alga may live in the skin of the
brittle star; there it dissolves the calcareous plates, so that the arms
may break apart. Or a curious little degenerate copepod may live as a
parasite within the gonads, destroying them and rendering the animal
sterile.

My first meeting with a live West Indian basket star was something I
shall never forget. I was wading off Ohio Key in water little more than
knee deep when I found it among some seaweeds, gently drifting on the
tide. Its upper surface was the color of a young fawn, with lighter
shades beneath. The searching, exploring, testing branchlets at the tips
of the arms reminded me of the delicate tendrils by which a growing vine
seeks out places to which it may attach itself. For many minutes I stood
beside it, lost to all but its extraordinary and somehow fragile beauty.
I had no wish to “collect” it; to disturb such a being would have seemed
a desecration. Finally the rising tide and the need to visit other parts
of the flat before they became too deeply flooded drove me on, and when
I returned the basket star had disappeared.

The basket starfish or basket fish is related to the brittle stars and
serpent stars but displays remarkable differences of structure: each of
the five arms diverges into branching V’s, which branch again, and then
again and again until a maze of curling tendrils forms the periphery of
the animal. Indulging their taste for the dramatic, early naturalists
named the basket stars for those monsters of Greek mythology, the
Gorgons, who wore snakes in place of hair and whose hideous aspect was
supposed to turn men to stone; so the family comprising these bizarre
echinoderms is known as the Gorgonocephalidae. To some imaginations
their appearance may be “snaky-locked,” but the effect is one of beauty,
grace, and elegance.

All the way from the Arctic to the West Indies basket stars of one
species or another live in coastal waters, and many go down to lightless
sea bottoms nearly a mile beneath the surface. They may walk about over
the ocean floor, moving delicately on the tips of their arms. As
Alexander Agassiz long ago described it, the animal stands “as it were
on tiptoe, so that the ramifications of the arms form a kind of
trellis-work all around it, reaching to the ground, while the disk forms
a roof.” Or again they may cling to gorgonians or other fixed sea
growths and reach out into the water. The branching arms serve as a
fine-meshed net to ensnare small sea creatures. On some grounds the
basket stars are not only abundant but associate in herds of many
individuals as though for a common purpose. Then the arms of neighboring
animals become entwined in a continuous living net to capture all the
small fry of the sea who venture, or are helplessly carried, within
reach of the millions of grasping tendrils.

To see a basket starfish close inshore is one of those rare happenings
that lives always in memory, but it is far otherwise with certain other
members of the spiny-skinned tribe of echinoderms—the holothurians, or
sea cucumbers. I have never waded far out onto the flats without meeting
them. Their large dark forms, shaped much like the vegetable whose name
they have been given, stand out clearly against the white sand where
they lie sluggishly, sometimes partly buried. The holothurians perform a
function in the sea that is roughly comparable to that of earthworms on
land, ingesting quantities of sand and mud and passing it through their
bodies. Most of them use a crown of blunt tentacles operated by strong
muscles to shovel the bottom sediments into their mouths, then extract
food particles from this detritus as it passes through their bodies.
Perhaps some calcareous materials are dissolved out by the chemistry of
the holothurian body.

Because of their abundance and the nature of their activities, the sea
cucumbers profoundly influence the distribution of the bottom deposits
around the coral reefs and islands. In a single year, it has been
estimated, the holothurians in an area less than two miles square may
redistribute 1000 tons of bottom substance. And there is evidence also
concerning their work on sea bottoms lying at abyssal depths. The
carpeting sediments, which accumulate slowly but unceasingly, lie in
orderly layers from which geologists can read many chapters of the past
history of the earth. But sometimes the layers are curiously disturbed.
Bits of volcanic ash shard originating, for example, from some ancient
eruptions of Vesuvius, may in some places lie, not in a thin layer
representing and dating the eruption, but widely scattered through the
overlying layers of other sediments. Geologists regard this as the work
of deep-sea holothurians. And other evidence from deep dredgings and
bottom samplings suggests the existence of herds of holothurians on the
sea floor at great depths, working over a bottom area, then moving on in
a vast migration directed, not by seasonal change, but by the scarcity
of food in those deep and lightless regions.

Except in those parts of the world where they are sought as human food
(they are the “trepang,” or _bêche-de-mer_, of Oriental markets) the sea
cucumbers have few known enemies, yet they possess a strange defense
mechanism that they employ when strongly disturbed. Then the holothurian
may contract strongly and hurl out the greater part of its internal
organs through a rupture in the body wall. Sometimes this action is
suicidal, but often the creature continues to live and grows a new set
of organs.

Dr. Ross Nigrelli and his associates of the New York Zoological Society
have recently discovered that the large West Indian sea cucumber (also
found about the Florida Keys) produces one of the most powerful of all
known animal poisons, presumably as a chemical means of defense.
Laboratory experiments showed that even small doses of the poison affect
all kinds of animals, from protozoa to mammals. Fish confined in a tank
with the cucumber always die when the act of evisceration occurs. The
study of this natural toxin reveals the hazardous existence of many
small creatures that live in association with another. The sea cucumber
attracts a number of such animal associates or commensals. This
particular species very often has a small pearl fish, Fierasfer, living
within the shelter of the cloacal cavity, which the respiratory
activities of the cucumber keep supplied with well-oxygenated water. But
the well-being, and indeed the very life of the small Fierasfer seem to
be constantly endangered, for the commensal fish is actually living
beside a vat of deadly poison that may at any moment be ruptured.
Apparently the fish has not developed an immunity to the poison of the
holothurian, for Dr. Nigrelli found that if the cucumber was disturbed,
its tenant Fierasfer would drift out in a moribund condition, even if
actual evisceration did not take place.

Dark patches like the shadows of clouds are scattered over the inshore
shallows of the reef flats. Each is a dense growth of sea grass pushing
up flat blades through the sand, forming a drowned island of shelter and
security for many animals. About the Keys these grass patches consist
largely of stands of turtle grass, with which manatee grass and shoal
grass may be intermingled. All belong to the highest group of
plants—the seed plants—and so are different from the algae or
seaweeds. The algae are the earth’s oldest plants, and they have always
belonged to the sea or the fresh waters. But the seed plants originated
on land only within the past 60 million years or so and those now living
in the sea are descended from ancestors who returned to it from the
land—how or why it is hard to say. Now they live where the salt sea
covers them and rises above them. They open their flowers under the
water; their pollen is water-borne; their seeds mature and fall and are
carried away by the tide. Thrusting down their roots into the sand and
the shifting coral debris, the sea grasses achieve a firmer attachment
than the rootless algae do; where they grow thickly they help to secure
the offshore sands against the currents, as on land the dune grasses
hold the dry sands against the winds.

In the islands of turtle grass many animals find food and shelter. The
giant starfish, Oreaster, lives here. So do the large pink or queen
conch, the fighting conch, the tulip band shell, the helmet shells and
the cask shells. A strange, armor-encased fish, the cowfish, swims just
above the bottom, parting grass blades to which pipefish and sea horses
cling. Baby octopuses hide among the roots and when pursued dive down
deep into the yielding sand and disappear from view. Down in that
grass-root under-turf many other small beings, of diverse kinds, live
deep within the shadowed coolness, to come out only when night and
darkness hide them.

But by day many of the bolder inhabitants may be seen by one who wades
to the grassy patches and peers down through the clarifying glass of a
water telescope, or, swimming above the deeper patches, looks down
through a face mask. Here one is most apt to find, in life, the large
mollusks that are familiar because their dead and empty shells are
common on the beach or in shell collections.

Here in the grass is the queen conch, which in earlier days had a place
on almost every Victorian mantel or hearth, and even today is displayed
by the hundred at every Florida roadside stand selling tourist
souvenirs. Through excessive fishing, however, it is becoming rare in
the Florida Keys and is now exported from the Bahamas for use in cutting
cameos. The weight and massiveness of its shell, the sharp spire and the
heavily armored whorls are eloquent of the defenses raised, through the
slow interaction of biology and environment, by myriad ancestral
generations. Despite the cumbrous shell and the massive body that
thrusts itself out to move over the bottom by grotesque leaps and
tumblings, the queen conch seems an alert and sentient creature. Perhaps
this effect is heightened by the eyes borne on the tips of two long
tubular tentacles. The way the eyes are moved and directed leaves little
doubt that they receive impressions of the animal’s surroundings and
transmit them to the nerve centers that serve in place of a brain.

Although its strength and awareness seem to fit the queen conch for a
predatory life, it is probably a scavenger that only occasionally turns
to live prey. Its enemies must be comparatively few and ineffectual, but
the conch has formed one very curious association. A small fish
habitually lives within its mantle cavity. There can be little free
space when all of the body and foot are drawn into the shell, but
somehow there is room for the cardinal fish, an inch-long creature.
Whenever danger threatens, it darts into the fleshy cavern deep within
the shell of the conch. There it is temporarily imprisoned when the
snail pulls back into its shell and closes the sickle-shaped operculum.

To other, smaller beings that find their way into the interior of the
shell, the conch reacts less tolerantly. Current-borne eggs of many sea
creatures, larvae of marine worms, minute shrimp or even fish, or
non-living particles like grains of sand, may swim or drift inside and,
lodging on shell or mantle, set up an irritation. To this the conch
responds with ancient defenses, acting to wall off the particle so that
it can no longer irritate delicate tissues. The glands of the mantle
secrete about this nucleus of foreign matter layer after layer of
mother-of-pearl—the same lustrous substance that lines the inside of
the shell. In this way the conch creates the pink pearls sometimes found
within it.

The human swimmer drifting idly above the turtle grass—if he is patient
enough and observant enough—may see something of other lives being
lived above the coral sand, from which the thin flat blades of grass
reach upward and sway to the motion of the water, leaning shoreward on a
flooding tide and seaward on the ebb. If, for example, he looks very
carefully he may see what he had thought to be a blade of grass (so
perfectly did it simulate one by form and color and movement) detach
itself from the sand and go swimming through the water. The pipefish—an
incredibly long, slender, and bony-ringed creature that seems quite
unfishlike—swims between the grasses slowly and with deliberate
movement, now with its body held vertically, now leaning horizontally
into the water. The slim head with its long, bony snout is thrust with
probing motions into clusters of turtle grass leaves or down among the
roots, as the fish searches for small food animals. Suddenly there is a
quick, inflating motion of the cheek, and a tiny crustacean is sucked in
through the tube-like beak, as one would suck a soda through a straw.

The pipefish begins life in a strange manner, being developed, nurtured,
and reared beyond the stage of helpless infancy by the male parent, who
keeps his young within a protective pouch. During the mating act of the
pair, the ova are fertilized and are placed in this pouch by the female;
there they develop and hatch, and to this marsupium the young may return
again and again in moments of danger, even long after they are able to
swim out into the sea at will.

So effective is the camouflage of another inhabitant of the grass—the
sea horse—that only the sharpest eye can detect one at rest, its
flexible tail gripping a blade of grass and its bony little body leaning
out into the currents like a piece of vegetation. The sea horse is
completely encased in an armor composed of interlocking bony plates;
these take the place of ordinary scales and seem to be a sort of
evolutionary harking back to the time when fish depended on heavy armor
to protect them from their enemies. The edges of the plates, where they
join and interlock, are produced into ridges, knobs, and spines to form
the characteristic surface pattern.

Sea horses often live in vegetation that is floating rather than rooted;
such individuals may then become part of that steady northward drift
bearing plants, associated animals, and the larvae of countless sea
forms into the open Atlantic and eastward toward Europe, or into the
Sargasso Sea. Such sea-horse voyagers in the Gulf Stream sometimes are
carried ashore on the southern Atlantic coast along with bits of
wind- and current-borne sargassum weed to which they cling.

In some of the turtle-grass jungles all of the smaller inhabitants seem
to borrow a protective color from their surroundings. I have dragged a
small dredge in such a place and found, entangled in the handfuls of
grass that came up, dozens of small animals of different species, all an
amazing, bright green hue. There were green spider crabs with extremely
long, jointed legs. There were small shrimp, also grass-green. Perhaps
the most fantastic touch was contributed by several baby cowfish. Like
their elders, whose remains one often finds in the debris of the high
tide line, these little cowfish were encased in bony boxes that held
head and body in an inflexible case, from which fins and tail protruded
as the only movable parts. From tip of tail to the little
forward-projecting, bovine horns, these small cowfish were the green of
the grass in which they lived.

Especially where they border the channels between the Keys, the shoals
carpeted with marine grasses are visited from time to time by sea
turtles, which live in some numbers about the outer reef. The hawksbill
wanders far out to sea, and seldom turns landward; but the green and
loggerhead turtles often swim into the shallow waters of Hawk Channel or
seek the passages between the Keys, where the tides race swiftly. When
these turtles visit the grassy shoals they are usually seeking those
inflated sand dollars, the sea biscuits, whose home is among the grass,
or they may seize some of the conchs. Apart from others of their own
kind, the conchs probably have no more dangerous enemies than the big
turtles.

However far they may wander, loggerhead, green, or hawksbill all must
return to land for the spawning season. There are no spawning places on
the Keys of coral rock or limestone, but on some of the sand keys of the
Tortugas group the loggerhead and the green turtles emerge from the
ocean and lumber over the sand like prehistoric beasts to dig their
nests and bury their eggs. The chief spawning places of the turtles,
however, are on the beaches of Cape Sable and other sand strands of
Florida, and farther north in Georgia and the Carolinas.

If the predatory visits of the big turtles to the sea-grass meadows are
sporadic, it is far otherwise with the ceaseless, day-by-day preying of
the various conchs, one upon another, and all upon mussels or oysters,
sea urchins and sand dollars. The chief predator of all the conchs is
the dusky-red spindle-shaped one called the horse conch. One has only to
see it feeding to realize how powerful it is; when the massive body,
brick-red like the shell, is extended to enfold and overwhelm its prey,
it seems impossible to believe that so much flesh can ever be drawn back
into the shell again. Even the king crown conch, itself a predator on
many other conchs, is no match for it. No other American gastropods
approach its size. (One-foot individuals are fairly common and the
giants of its kind are two feet long.) The big cask shells also are
victims of the horse conch, while they themselves feed usually on
urchins. Yet I have felt little awareness of this relentless predation
on making a casual visit to the habitat of the conchs. There are long
periods of somnolence and repletion, and the grassy world by day seems a
peaceful place. A conch gliding over the coral sand, a sea cucumber
burrowing sluggishly among the roots of the grasses, or the dark and
swiftly fleeting forms of sea hares in sudden passage may be the only
visible signs of life and motion. For by day life is in retreat; life is
buried and hidden in crevices and corners of ledge and rock; life has
crept under or within the shelter of sponge or gorgonian or coral or
empty shell. In the shallow waters of the shore, many creatures must
avoid the penetrating sunlight that irritates sensitive tissues and
reveals prey to predator.

But that which seems quiescent—a dream world inhabited by creatures
that move sluggishly or not at all—comes swiftly to life when the day
ends. When I have lingered on the reef flat until dusk fell, a strange
new world, full of tensions and alarms, has replaced the peaceful
languor of the day. For then hunter and hunted are abroad. The spiny
lobster steals out from under the sheltering bulk of a big sponge and
flashes away across the open water. The gray snapper and the barracuda
patrol the channels between the Keys and dart into the shallows in swift
pursuit. Crabs emerge from hidden caverns; sea snails of varied shape
and size creep out from under rocks. In sudden movements, swirling
waters, and half-seen shadows that dart across my path as I wade
shoreward, I sense the ancient drama of the strong against the weak.

Or if I have listened from the deck of a boat anchored at night among
the Keys, I have heard splashings of large bodies moving in the shallows
nearby, or the slap of a broad form striking water as a sting ray leaps
into the air and falls, leaps and falls again. One of those whom the
night stirs to activity is the needle-fish, long, slender, and powerful
of body, armed with a sharp beak that would seem more appropriate in a
bird. By day the small needle-fish may be seen from wharves and sea
walls as they come close inshore, floating at the surface like straws
adrift in the water. At night the large fish, that have ranged far to
sea, come in to feed in the shallows, sometimes singly, sometimes in
large schools. They leap out of the water or go skipping along the
surface, making a disturbance that can be heard for a long distance on a
calm night. Fishermen say that the needle-fish jump toward a light—that
if one is out in a small boat at night where the needle-fish are
hunting, it is dangerous, if not suicidal, to show a light, for the fish
will leap across the boat. Probably there is an element of truth in the
belief, for in some places in the Keys the beam of a searchlight thrown
out across the water on a calm night—even if no fish have been heard
about—will often be greeted by a series of splashes as a dozen or more
large fish leap out of the water. The leaps, however, are usually at
right angles to the beam, and the fish seem to be trying to escape the
light.

This coral coast is the drowned world of the offshore reef and the world
of the shallow reef flats with their fringing, rocky rim; it is also the
green world of the mangrove, silent, mysterious, always
changing—eloquent of a life force strong enough to alter the visible
face of its world. As the corals dominate the seaward margin of the
keys, the mangroves possess the sheltered or bay shores, completely
covering many of the smaller keys, pushing out into the water to lessen
the spaces between the islands, building an island where once there was
only a shoal, creating land where once there was sea.

Mangroves are among the far migrants of the plant kingdom, forever
sending their young stages off to establish pioneer colonies a score, a
hundred, or a thousand miles from the parent stock. The same species
live on the tropical coasts of America and the west coast of Africa.
Probably the American mangroves crossed from Africa eons ago, via the
Equatorial Current—and probably such migrants continue to arrive
unnoticed from time to time. How the mangroves got to the Pacific coast
of tropical America is an interesting problem. There is no continuous
system of currents that would have carried them around the Horn, and
besides the cold water to the south would be a barrier. It is not
certain how early the mangroves arose, but definite fossil records seem
to go back only to the Cenozoic, whereas the Panama Ridge, separating
Atlantic from Pacific waters, probably arose much earlier, toward the
end of the Mesozoic. By some means, however, the mangroves made the
journey to Pacific shores, where they became established. Their further
migrations also are mysterious. They must have dispatched their migrant
seedlings into the great currents of the Pacific, for at least one
American species grows on the islands of Fiji and Tonga and seems to
have drifted as well to Cocos-Keeling and Christmas Islands. And some
appeared as new colonists on the devastated island of Krakatoa, after it
was virtually destroyed by volcanic eruption in 1883.

The mangroves belong to the highest group of plants, the spermatophytes
or seed-bearers, whose earliest forms developed on land, and as such
they are a botanical example of that return toward the sea that is
always fascinating to observe. Among mammals, the seals and whales made
such a return to the habitat of their ancestors. The marine grasses have
gone even farther than the mangrove, for they live permanently
submerged. But why this return to salt water? Perhaps the mangroves or
their ancestral stock were forced out of more crowded habitats by the
competition of other species. Whatever the reason, they have invaded and
established themselves in the difficult world of the shore with such
success that no plant now threatens their dominance there.

The saga of an individual mangrove begins when the long pendent green
seedling, produced on the parent tree, drops to the floor of the swamp.
Perhaps this happens at low tide when all the water has drained away;
then the seedling lies amid the tangled roots, waiting till the salt
flood comes in to lift it and later float it seaward on the turn of the
tide. Of all the hundreds of thousands of red mangrove seedlings
produced annually on the southern Florida coast, probably less than half
remain to develop near the parent trees. The rest put out to sea, their
buoyant structure keeping them in the surface waters, moving with the
flow of the currents. They may drift for many months, being able to
survive the normal vicissitudes of such a journey—sun, rain, the
battering of a rough sea. At first they float horizontally, but with
increasing age and the development of their tissues for a new phase of
life they gradually come to lie almost vertically with the future root
end downward, ready for that contact with earth upon which their future
existence depends.

Perhaps in the path of such a pelagic seedling there may lie a small
shoal, a little ridge off an island shore, deposited, grain by grain, by
the waves. As the tide floats the young mangrove into the shallows, the
downward-pressing tip touches the shoal; the sharp point, pressing
earthward, becomes embedded. The water movements of later tides rising
and falling press the young plant firmly into the receptive soil. Later,
perhaps, they bring other seedlings to lodge beside it.

No sooner have the young mangroves anchored themselves than they begin
to grow, sending out tiers of roots that arch out and downward to form a
circle of supporting props. Among this rapidly increasing tangle of
roots, debris of all sorts comes to rest—decaying vegetation,
driftwood, shells, coral fragments, uprooted sponges and other sea
growths. From such simple beginnings, an island is born.

In twenty to thirty years the young mangroves have acquired the stature
of trees. These mature mangroves can resist the battering of a
considerable surf, and probably are destroyed only by violent
hurricanes. Once in many years such a hurricane comes. Because of the
efficiency of their buttressing roots, few mangroves are uprooted even
by a violent blow. But the high storm tides press far inland through the
swamp, carrying the salt of the open sea into the forested interior.
Leaves and small branches are stripped off and carried away, and if the
wind is truly violent the trunks and limbs of the great trees are shaken
and battered until the bark separates and blows away in sheets, exposing
the naked trunk to the burning salt breath of the storm. This may be the
history of some of the mangrove ghost forests bordering the Florida
coast. But such catastrophes are rare, and in southwestern Florida whole
islands of mangroves come to maturity without any serious interruption
of their growth.

A mangrove forest, its fringing trees literally standing in salt water,
extending back into darkening swamps of its own creation, is full of the
mysterious beauty of massive and contorted trunks, of tangled roots, and
of dark green foliage spreading an almost unbroken canopy. The forest
with its associated swamp forms a curious world. On their flood the
tides rise over the roots of the outermost trees and penetrate into the
swamplands, carrying many small migrants—the pelagic larvae of sea
creatures. Over the ages many of these have found a suitable climate for
their survival and have become established, some on the roots or trunks
of the mangroves, some in the soft mud of the intertidal zone, some on
the bottom of the bay offshore. The mangrove may be the only kind of
tree, or the only seed plant growing there; all the associated plants
and animals are bound to it by biological ties.

Within the range of the tides the prop roots of the mangroves are
thickly overgrown with an oyster whose shell has fingerlike projections
to grasp these firm supports and so to remain above the mud. On the
night ebb tides, raccoons follow the water down, leaving meandering
tracks across the mud as they move from root to root, finding food
within the shells of the oysters. The crown conch also preys heavily on
these oysters of the mangroves. Fiddler crabs dig tunnels in the mud,
sheltering deep within them when the salt tide rises. These crabs are
remarkable for the possession, by the males, of one immense claw—the
“fiddle”—that is incessantly waved about, apparently serving for
communication as well as for defense. Fiddlers eat plant debris picked
from the surface of sand or mud. For this the female has two spoon
claws; the male, because of his fiddle, only one. By their activities
the crabs help to aerate the heavy mud, which is saturated with organic
debris and so deficient in oxygen that the mangroves must breathe
through their aerial roots to supplement what their buried roots can
obtain. Brittle stars and strange burrowing crustaceans live among the
roots, while overhead in the upper branches great colonies of pelicans
and herons find roosting and nesting places.

Here on these mangrove-fringed shores some of the pioneering mollusks
and crustaceans are learning to live out of the sea from which they
recently came. Among the mangroves and in marshy areas where the tides
rise over the roots of sea grasses there is a small snail whose race is
moving landward. This is the coffee-bean shell, a small creature within
a short, widely ovate shell tinted with the greens and browns of its
environment. When the tide rises the snails clamber up on the mangrove
roots or climb the stems of the grasses, deferring as long as possible
the moment of contact with the sea. Among the crabs, too, land forms are
evolving. The purple-clawed hermit inhabits the strip above the highest
tidal flotsam, where land vegetation fringes the shore, but in the
breeding season it moves down toward the sea. Then hundreds of them lurk
under logs and bits of driftwood, waiting for the moment when the eggs,
carried by the female under her body, shall be ready to hatch. At that
time the crabs dash into the sea, liberating the young into the
ancestral waters. Nearing the end of its evolutionary journey is the
large white crab of the Bahamas and southern Florida. It is a land
dweller and an air-breather, and it seems to have cut its ties with the
sea—all its ties, that is, but one. For in the spring the white crabs
engage in a lemming-like march to the sea, entering it to release their
young. In time the crabs of a new generation, having completed their
embryonic life in the sea, emerge from the water and seek the land home
of their parents.

For hundreds of miles this world of swamp and forest created by the
mangroves extends northward, sweeping from the Keys around the southern
tip of the Florida mainland, reaching from Cape Sable north along the
coast of the Gulf of Mexico through all the Ten Thousand Islands. This
is one of the great mangrove swamps of the world, a wilderness untamed
and almost unvisited by man. Flying above it, one can see the mangroves
at work. From the air the Ten Thousand Islands show a significant shape
and structure. Geologists describe them as looking like a school of fish
swimming in a southeasterly direction—each fish-shaped island having an
“eye” of water in its enlarged end, the heads of all the little “fish”
pointing to the southeast. Before these islands came to be, one may
suppose, the wavelets of a shallow sea heaped the sand of its floor into
little ridges. Then came the colonizing mangroves, converting the ripple
marks to islands, perpetuating in living green forest the shape and
trend of the sand ripples.

Today we can see, from one generation of man to another, where several
small islands have coalesced to form one, or where the land has grown
out and an island has merged with it—sea becoming land almost before
our eyes.

What is the future of this mangrove coast? If it is written in its
recent past we can foretell it: the building of a vast land area where
today there is water with scattered islands. But we who live today can
only wonder; a rising sea could write a different history.

Meanwhile the mangroves press on, spreading their silent forests mile
upon mile under tropical skies, sending down their grasping roots,
dropping their migrant seedlings one by one, launching them into the
drifting tides on far voyages.

And offshore, under the surface waters where the moonlight falls in
broken, argent beams, under the tidal currents streaming shoreward in
the still night, the pulse of life surges on the reef. As all the
billions of the coral animals draw from the sea the necessities of their
existence, by swift metabolism converting the tissues of copepods and
snail larvae and minuscule worms into the substance of their own bodies,
so the corals grow and reproduce and bud, each of the tiny creatures
adding its own limy chamber to the structure of the reef.

And as the years pass, and the centuries merge into the unbroken stream
of time, these architects of coral reef and mangrove swamp build toward
a shadowy future. But neither the corals nor the mangroves, but the sea
itself will determine when that which they build will belong to the
land, or when it will be reclaimed for the sea.




                            The Enduring Sea


NOW I HEAR the sea sounds about me; the night high tide is rising,
swirling with a confused rush of waters against the rocks below my study
window. Fog has come into the bay from the open sea, and it lies over
water and over the land’s edge, seeping back into the spruces and
stealing softly among the juniper and the bayberry. The restive waters,
the cold wet breath of the fog, are of a world in which man is an uneasy
trespasser; he punctuates the night with the complaining groan and grunt
of a foghorn, sensing the power and menace of the sea.

Hearing the rising tide, I think how it is pressing also against other
shores I know—rising on a southern beach where there is no fog, but a
moon edging all the waves with silver and touching the wet sands with
lambent sheen, and on a still more distant shore sending its streaming
currents against the moonlit pinnacles and the dark caves of the coral
rock.

Then in my thoughts these shores, so different in their nature and in
the inhabitants they support, are made one by the unifying touch of the
sea. For the differences I sense in this particular instant of time that
is mine are but the differences of a moment, determined by our place in
the stream of time and in the long rhythms of the sea. Once this rocky
coast beneath me was a plain of sand; then the sea rose and found a new
shore line. And again in some shadowy future the surf will have ground
these rocks to sand and will have returned the coast to its earlier
state. And so in my mind’s eye these coastal forms merge and blend in a
shifting, kaleidoscopic pattern in which there is no finality, no
ultimate and fixed reality—earth becoming fluid as the sea itself.

On all these shores there are echoes of past and future: of the flow of
time, obliterating yet containing all that has gone before; of the sea’s
eternal rhythms—the tides, the beat of surf, the pressing rivers of the
currents—shaping, changing, dominating; of the stream of life, flowing
as inexorably as any ocean current, from past to unknown future. For as
the shore configuration changes in the flow of time, the pattern of life
changes, never static, never quite the same from year to year. Whenever
the sea builds a new coast, waves of living creatures surge against it,
seeking a foothold, establishing their colonies. And so we come to
perceive life as a force as tangible as any of the physical realities of
the sea, a force strong and purposeful, as incapable of being crushed or
diverted from its ends as the rising tide.

Contemplating the teeming life of the shore, we have an uneasy sense of
the communication of some universal truth that lies just beyond our
grasp. What is the message signaled by the hordes of diatoms, flashing
their microscopic lights in the night sea? What truth is expressed by
the legions of the barnacles, whitening the rocks with their
habitations, each small creature within finding the necessities of its
existence in the sweep of the surf? And what is the meaning of so tiny a
being as the transparent wisp of protoplasm that is a sea lace, existing
for some reason inscrutable to us—a reason that demands its presence by
the trillion amid the rocks and weeds of the shore? The meaning haunts
and ever eludes us, and in its very pursuit we approach the ultimate
mystery of Life itself.




                        Appendix: Classification


         _Protophyta, Protozoa: One-celled Plants and Animals_

THE SIMPLEST FORMS of cellular life are the one-celled plants
(Protophyta) and one-celled animals (Protozoa). In both groups, however,
there are many forms that defy attempts to place them definitely in one
category or another because they display characteristics usually
considered animal-like along with others usually thought definitive of
plants. The _Dinoflagellata_ form such an indeterminate group, and are
claimed both by zoologists and by botanists. Although a few are large
enough to be seen without magnification, most are smaller. Some wear
shells with spines and elaborate markings. Some have a remarkable,
eye-like sense organ. All dinoflagellates are immensely important in the
economy of the sea as food for certain fishes and other animals.
Noctiluca is a relatively large dinoflagellate of coastal waters, where
it produces brilliant displays of phosphorescence, or by day reddens the
water by the abundance of its pigmented cells. Other species are the
cause of the phenomenon known as “red tide,” in which the sea is
discolored and fishes and other animals die from poisons given off by
the minute cells. The red or green scum of high tide pools, “red rain,”
and “red snow” are growths of these forms, or of green algae (e.g.,
Sphaerella). Much phosphorescence or “burning” of the sea is caused by
dinoflagellates, which create a uniformly diffused light, lacking large
spots of illumination. Examined closely, in a vessel of water, the light
is seen to consist of tiny sparks.

The _Radiolaria_ are one-celled animals whose protoplasm is contained in
siliceous shells of extraordinary beauty. These minute shells, sinking
to the bottom, accumulate there to form one of the characteristic oozes
or sediments of the sea floor. The _Foraminifera_ are another
unicellular group. Most have calcareous shells, though some build their
protective structures with sand grains or sponge spicules. The shells,
eventually drifting to the floor of the ocean, cover vast areas with
calcareous sediments that, through geologic change, may become compacted
into limestone or chalk, and raised to form such features of the present
landscape as the chalk cliffs of England. Most Foraminifera are so
minute that one gram of sand might contain up to 50,000 shells. On the
other hand, a fossil species, Nummulites, was sometimes 6 or 7 inches
across and formed limestone beds in Northern Africa, Europe, and Asia.
This limestone was used in the building of the Sphinx and the great
pyramids. Fossil Foraminifera are much used by geologises in the oil
industry in correlating rock strata.

_Diatoms_ (Greek, _diatomos_—cut in two) are minute plants usually
classified among the yellow-green algae because they contain granules of
yellow pigment. They exist as single cells or in chains of cells. The
living tissue of a diatom is encased within a shell of silica, of which
one half fits over the other, as a lid over a box. Fine etchings on the
surface of the shell create beautiful patterns and are characteristic
for the various species. Most diatoms live in the open sea, and because
they exist in inconceivable abundance are the most important single food
stuff in the ocean, being eaten not only by many small animals of the
plankton, but by many larger creatures, as mussels and oysters. The hard
shells sink to the bottom after the death of the tissues, and accumulate
there to form diatom oozes that cover vast areas of ocean floor.

The _blue-green algae_, or _Cyanophyceae_, are among the simplest and
oldest forms of life and are the most ancient plants that still exist.
They are widely distributed and occur even in hot springs and other
places where conditions are so difficult that no other plant life can
exist. They often multiply in phenomenal numbers, giving the surface of
ponds and other still waters a colored film known as water bloom. Most
are encased in gelatinous sheaths that protect them from extreme heat or
cold. They are well represented in the “black zone” above high tide line
on rocky shores.

                      _Thallophyta: Higher Algae_

THE GREEN ALGAE, or _Chlorophyceae_, are able to endure strong light and
thrive high in the intertidal zone. They include such familiar forms as
the leafy sea lettuce and a stringy, tube-like alga of high rocks and
tide pools called Enteromorpha (“intestine-shaped”). In the tropics some
of the most common green algae are the brush-shaped Penicillus that
forms minute groves over the coral reef flats, and the beautiful little
cup alga, Acetabularia, like tiny, inverted mushrooms of purest green.
Some of the green algae of the tropics are important in the economy of
the sea as concentrators of calcium. Although the group is most typical
of warm, tropical seas, the green algae are found on the shore wherever
there is strong sunlight, and others of the group live in fresh water.

The _brown algae_, or _Phaeophyceae_, possess various pigments that
conceal their chlorophyll, so their prevailing colors are brown,
yellowish, or olive-green. They are largely absent from warmer latitudes
except in deep water, being unable to endure heat and strong sun. An
exception is the Sargassum weed of tropical shores, which drifts
northward in the Gulf Stream. On northern coasts the brown rockweeds
live between tide lines, and the kelps or oarweeds from the low tide
line down to depths of 40 to 50 feet. Although all of the algae select
and concentrate in their tissues many different chemicals present in sea
water, the brown seaweeds and especially the kelps are extraordinary in
the quantity of iodine stored. Formerly they were utilized widely in the
industrial production of iodine. The same seaweeds now are important in
the production of the carbohydrate algin for use in fire-resistant
textiles, jellies, ice cream, cosmetics, and various industrial
processes. The presence of alginic acid gives these seaweeds their great
resilience in heavy surf.

The _red algae_, or _Rhodophyceae_, most sensitive to light of all the
seaweeds, send only a few hardy species (including Irish moss and dulse)
into the intertidal zone; most are delicate and graceful seaweeds living
for the most part below low water. Some live deeper than any other
seaweeds, going down into the dim regions 200 fathoms or more below the
surface. Some (the corallines) form hard crusts on rocks or shells.
Containing magnesium carbonate as well as calcium carbonate, these algae
seem to have played an important geochemical role in earth history,
perhaps having aided the formation of the magnesium-rich marble
dolomite.

                          _Porifera: Sponges_

THE SPONGES (Porifera, or pore-bearers) are among the simplest of
animals, being little more than an aggregation of cells. Yet they have
gone a step beyond the Protozoa, for there are inner and outer layers of
cells, with some hint of specialization of function—some for drawing in
water, some for taking in food, some for reproduction. All these cells
cohere and work together to carry out the single purpose of the
sponge—to pass the waters of the sea through the sieves of its own
being. A sponge is an elaborate system of canals contained in a matrix
of fibrous or mineral substance, the whole pierced by numerous small
entrance pores and larger exit holes. The inmost or central cavities are
lined with flagellated cells that remind one of protozoan flagellates.
The lashing of the whiplike flagella creates currents to draw in water.
In passage through the sponge, the water gives up food, minerals, and
oxygen, and carries away waste products.

To a certain extent, each of the smaller groups within the sponge phylum
has a physical appearance and habit of life that is characteristic, yet
the sponges are probably more plastic in relation to their environment
than any other animals. In surf they take the form of a flattened crust,
almost without regard to species; in deep, quiet water they may assume
an upright tubular form, or branch in a way suggestive of shrubbery.
Their shape, therefore, is little or no aid in identification, and the
classification of sponges is based chiefly on the nature of their
skeleton, which is a loose network of minute hard structures called
spicules. In some the spicules are calcareous. In others they are
siliceous, although sea water contains only a trace of silica and the
sponge must have to filter prodigious quantities to obtain enough for
its spicules. The function of extracting silica from sea water is
confined to primitive forms of life, and among animals does not occur
above the sponges. Commercial sponges fall into a third group, having a
skeleton of horny fibers. They are confined to tropical waters.

From such a beginning toward specialization, nature seems to have gone
back and made a fresh start with other materials. All evidence points
toward a separate origin for the coelenterates and all other more
complex animals, leaving the sponges in an evolutionary blind alley.

         _Coelenterata: Anemones, Corals, Jellyfish, Hydroids_

THE COELENTERATES, despite their simplicity, foreshadow the basic plan
on which, with elaborations, all the more highly developed animals are
formed. They possess two distinct layers of cells, the outer ectoderm
and the inner endoderm, sometimes with an undifferentiated middle layer
that is not cellular but is the forerunner of the third cell layer, the
mesoderm, of the higher groups. Each coelenterate is basically a hollow
double-walled tube, closed at one end and open at the other. Variations
of this plan have resulted in such diverse forms as the sea anemones,
corals, jellyfish, and hydroids.

All coelenterates possess stinging cells called nematocysts, each of
which is a coiled, pointed thread contained in a sac of turgid fluid,
ready to be expelled to impale or entangle passing prey. Stinging cells
are not developed in higher animals; although they have been reported in
flatworms and sea slugs, they have been secondarily acquired by eating
coelenterates.

The Hydrozoa display most clearly another peculiarity of this group,
known as alternation of generations. An attached, plantlike generation
produces a medusoid generation, shaped like small jellyfish. These, in
turn, produce another plantlike generation. In the hydroids the more
conspicuous generation is an attached, branching colony bearing
tentacled individuals, or hydranths, on its “stems.” Most of these are
shaped like small sea anemones and capture food. Other individuals bud
off the new generation—tiny medusae that (in many forms) swim away,
mature, and shed eggs or sperm cells into the sea. An egg produced by
such a medusa, when fertilized, develops into another plantlike stage.

In another group, the Scyphozoa, or true jellyfish, the plantlike
generation is the inconspicuous one, and the medusae are highly
developed. The jellyfish range from very small creatures to the immense
arctic jelly, Cyanea, which reaches an extreme diameter of 8 feet (1 to
3 feet is more common) with tentacles up to 75 feet long.

In the Anthozoa (flower animals) the medusoid generation has been
completely lost. This group includes the anemones, corals, sea fans, and
sea whips. The anemone represents the basic plan; all the rest of this
group are colonial forms in which the individual, anemone-like polyps
are embedded in some sort of matrix, which may be stony, as in the
reef-building corals, or, in the sea fans and sea whips, may consist of
a horny substance of protein nature, similar to the keratin of
vertebrate hair, nails, and scales.

                       _Ctenophora: Comb Jellies_

THE ENGLISH WRITER Barbellion once said that a comb jelly in sunlight is
the most beautiful thing in the world. Its tissues are almost crystal
clear, and as this little ovoid creature twirls in the water it flashes
iridescent lights. The ctenophores, or comb jellies, are sometimes
mistaken for jellyfish because of their transparency, but there are
various structural differences, with the “comb-plates” being
characteristic of the phylum. These occur in eight rows on the outer
surface. Each plate has a hinged attachment and bears hairlike cilia
along its free edge; as the plates flash in succession to propel the
animal through the water, the cilia break up the rays of sunlight and
produce the characteristic flashing.

Like some of the jellyfish, most ctenophores possess long tentacles.
These are equipped not with stinging cells, but with sticky pads that
capture prey by entanglement. Ctenophores eat enormous numbers of fish
fry and other small animals. They live chiefly in the surface waters.

The ctenophores comprise a small phylum, with less than 100 species.
Members of one of their groups have flattened bodies and do not swim,
but creep on the ocean floor. Some specialists believe these creeping
ctenophores have given rise to the flatworms.

                      _Platyhelminthes: Flatworms_

THE FLATWORMS include many parasitic as well as many free-living forms.
Leafy thin, the free-living flatworms flow like a living film over rocks
or sometimes swim by flapping undulations in a way reminiscent of
skates. They have made significant advances in an evolutionary sense.
They are the first to possess three primary layers of cells, a
characteristic of all higher animals. They also have a bilateral type of
symmetry (one side being a mirror image of the other), with a head end
that always goes first. They have the simple beginnings of a nervous
system and eyes that may be only simple pigment spots or, in some
species, well-developed organs with lenses. There is no circulatory
system, and perhaps it is because of this that all flatworms have such
thin bodies, in which all parts are in easy communication with the
exterior, and oxygen and carbon dioxide are easily passed through
surface membranes to underlying tissues.

Flatworms are found among seaweeds, on rocks, in tide pools, and lurking
in dead mollusk shells. They are usually carnivorous, devouring worms,
crustaceans, and mollusks of minute size.

                        _Nemertea: Ribbon Worms_

THE RIBBON WORMS have extraordinarily elastic bodies, sometimes round,
sometimes flat. One of them, the bootlace worm (_Lineus_ _longissimus_)
of British waters, may attain a length of 90 feet and is the longest of
all the invertebrates. The American Cerebratulus of shallow coastal
waters often is 20 feet long and about an inch wide. Most, however, are
only a few inches long and many are considerably less than an inch. They
habitually contract into coils or knots when disturbed.

All ribbon worms are highly muscular but lack the co-ordination of nerve
and muscle that higher worms have. There is a brain consisting of simple
nerve ganglia. Some have primitive hearing organs, and the
characteristic slits along the sides of the head (suggestive of a mouth)
seem to contain important organs of sensation. Although there are a few
hermaphroditic species, in most ribbon worms the sexes are separate.
There is, however, a strong tendency toward asexual reproduction, and
associated with this is a habit of breaking up into many pieces when
handled. The fragments then regenerate complete worms. Professor Wesley
Coe of Yale University found that a certain species of ribbon worm could
be cut repeatedly until eventually miniature worms less than one
one-hundred thousandth the volume of the original were obtained. An
adult can live a year without food, according to Professor Coe,
compensating for lack of nourishment by diminishing in size.

The ribbon worms are unique in the possession of an extensible weapon
called a proboscis, enclosed in a sheath and capable of being suddenly
everted, hurled out, and coiled around the prey, which is then drawn
back toward the mouth. In many species the proboscis is armed with a
sharp lance, or stylet, which if lost is quickly replaced by another
held in reserve. All ribbon worms are carnivorous, and many prey on the
bristle worms.

                       _Annelida: Bristle Worms_

THE ANNELID (ringed, or segmented) worms include several classes, one of
which, the Polychaeta (many bristles) includes most marine annelids.
Many of the polychaetes, or bristle worms, are active swimmers that make
their living as predators; others are more or less sedentary, building
tubes of various sorts in which they live, either feeding on detritus in
sand or mud or on plankton which they strain from the water. Some of
these worms are among the most beautiful creatures of the sea, their
bodies shining with iridescent splendor, or adorned with feathery crowns
of tentacles in soft and beautiful colors.

In their structure they represent a great advance over lower forms. Most
of them possess a circulatory system (although the blood worm, Glycera,
much used as bait, has no blood vessels but a blood-filled cavity
between the skin and the alimentary canal) and so are able to dispense
with the thinness of body of the flatworms, for the blood flowing
through vessels transports food and oxygen to all parts of the body. The
blood is red in some, green in others. The body consists of a series of
segments, several of the anterior ones being fused to form the head.
Each segment bears a pair of unbranched, unsegmented paddle-like
appendages for crawling or swimming.

Bristle worms include many diverse forms. The familiar nereids, or clam
worms, often used for bait, spend most of their lives in crude burrows
among stones on the sea bottom but emerge to hunt or, in swarms, to
spawn. The sluggish scale worms live under rocks, in muddy burrows, or
among the holdfasts of seaweeds. The serpulid worms build variously
shaped limy tubes from which only their heads emerge; other worms, like
the beautifully plumed Amphitrite, form mucous tubes under rocks or
crusts of coralline algae or on muddy bottoms, and a worm of colonial
habit, Sabellaria, uses coarse sand grains to build elaborate structures
that may be several feet across. Though honeycombed with the burrows of
the worms, these massive dwelling places are strong enough to bear the
weight of a man.

              _Arthropoda: Lobsters, Barnacles, Amphipods_

THE ARTHROPOD (jointed foot) phylum is an enormous group, comprising
five times as many species as are included in all the rest of the animal
phyla combined. The arthropods include the crustacea (e.g., crabs,
shrimps, lobsters), the insects, the myriopods (centipedes and
millipedes), the arachnids (spiders, mites, and king crabs) and the
tropical, wormlike Onychophora. All marine arthropods belong to the
class Crustacea except for a scant handful of insects, a few mites and
sea spiders, and the king crabs.

Whereas the paired appendages of the annelids are simple flaps, those of
the arthropods possess multiple joints and are specialized to perform
such varied functions as swimming, walking, handling food, and gaining
sensory impressions of the environment. Whereas the annelids interpose
only a simple cuticle between their internal organs and the environment,
the arthropods protect themselves by a rigid skeleton of chitin
impregnated with lime salts. This, in addition to being protective, has
the advantage of giving a firm support for the insertion of muscles. On
the other hand there is the disadvantage that, as the animal grows, the
rigid outer covering must be shed from time to time.

The crustaceans include such familiar animals as crabs, lobsters,
shrimps, and barnacles, as well as less-known creatures like the
ostracods, isopods, amphipods, and copepods, all of which are important
or interesting for one reason or another.

The _ostracods_ are unusual arthropods in that they are not segmented
but are enclosed in a two-part carapace, or shell, flattened from side
to side, and opened and closed by muscles like a mollusk’s shell. The
antennae act as oars and are extended through the opened carapace to row
the little animal through the water. Ostracods often live in seaweeds or
in sand on the ocean floor, usually being quiet by day and coming out to
feed at night. Many marine ostracods are luminous and as they swim about
emit little puffs of bluish light. They are one of the chief sources of
phosphorescence at sea. Even when dead and dried they retain the
phosphorescent quality to an astonishing degree. Professor E. Newton
Harvey of Princeton University says in his authoritative volume
_Bioluminescence_ that during the Second World War Japanese army
officers used dried ostracod powder in advanced positions where use of
flashlights was prohibited—by adding a few drops of water to a little
powder in the palm of the hand, they could obtain enough light to read
dispatches.

_Copepods_ (oar-footed) are very small crustaceans with rounded bodies,
jointed tails, and oarlike legs with which to propel themselves jerkily.
In spite of their minute size (from microscopic to half-inch) the
copepods form one of the basic populations of the sea, and are food for
an immense variety of other animals. They are an indispensable link in
the food chain by which the nutrient salts of the sea are eventually
made available (via plant plankton, animal plankton, carnivores) to
larger animals such as fishes and whales. Copepods of the genus Calanus,
known as “red feed,” redden large areas of ocean surface and are eaten
in prodigious numbers by herring and mackerel and also by certain
whales. Birds of the open sea such as petrels and albatrosses are
plankton feeders and sometimes subsist largely on copepods. In their
turn, the copepods graze on diatoms, eating sometimes as much as their
own weight in a day.

_Amphipods_ are small crustaceans that are flattened from side to side,
while _isopods_ are flattened from upper to lower surface. The names are
a scientific reference to the kinds of appendages possessed by these
small creatures. The amphipods have feet that can be used both for
swimming and walking or crawling. The isopods, or “equal-footed”
animals, have appendages that show little difference in size and shape
from one end of the body to the other.

On the shore the amphipods include the beach hoppers, or sand fleas,
that rise in clouds (leaping, not flying) from masses of seaweed when
they are disturbed, and others that live offshore in seaweed and under
rocks. They eat fragments and bits of organic debris and are themselves
eaten in great number by fish, birds, and other larger creatures. Many
amphipods wriggle along on their sides when out of water. Sand hoppers
use their tails and posterior legs as a spring and progress by leaps;
other species swim.

Isopods of the shore (closely related to the familiar sow bugs of the
garden) include the slaters (sea roaches, wharf rats, quay lice) often
seen running over rocks and wharf pilings. These have left the water and
seldom return to it; they drown if long submerged. Others live offshore,
often in seaweeds whose color and form they mimic. Still others swarm in
tide pools, sometimes nipping the skin of human waders to produce a
tingling or itching sensation. Most are scavengers; some are parasites;
and some form habitual associations (commensalism) with an animal of
unrelated species.

Both amphipods and isopods carry their young in brood chambers instead
of liberating eggs into the sea. This habit has helped some in each
group to live high on the shore and is a necessary preliminary to land
existence.

The barnacles belong to the order Cirripedia (Latin, _cirrus_—a ringlet
or curl), presumably named because of their gracefully curving feathery
appendages. The larval stages are free-living and resemble the larvae of
many other crustaceans, but the adults are attached, living in a shell
of calcareous material, fixed to rocks or other hard objects. The
gooseneck barnacles are attached by a leathery stalk; the rock or acorn
barnacles are attached directly. The gooseneck barnacles are often
oceanic, attaching themselves to ships and floating objects of all
sorts. Some of the acorn barnacles grow on the hide of whales or the
shells of sea turtles.

The large crustaceans—shrimps, crabs, and lobsters—not only are most
familiar but display the typical arthropod plan of body most clearly.
The head and thoracic regions usually are fused and covered with a hard
shell, or carapace; only the appendages indicate the division into
segments. The flexible abdomen or “tail,” on the other hand, is divided
into segments and usually is an important aid to swimming. Crabs,
however, keep the tail segments folded under the body.

The hard shell of an arthropod must be shed periodically as the animal
grows. The creature gets out of the old shell through a slit that opens
up usually across the back. Underneath is the new shell, much folded and
wrinkled, soft and tender. The crustacean, after shedding, may spend
days in seclusion, hiding from enemies until its armor has hardened.

The class Arachnoidea includes in one group the horseshoe crabs, and in
another diverse one the spiders and mites, only a few of which are
marine. The horseshoe, or king, crab has a peculiar distribution, being
very abundant on the Atlantic coast of America, absent from Europe, and
represented by three species on the Asiatic coast from India to Japan.
Its larval stages closely resemble the ancient trilobites of Cambrian
times and as a reminder of those past ages it is often called a living
fossil. Horseshoe crabs are abundant along the shores of bays and other
relatively quiet waters, where they eat clams, worms, and other small
animals. They come out on beaches early in the summer to lay eggs in
depressions scooped out in the sand.

                   _Bryozoa: Moss Animals, Sea Laces_

THE BRYOZOA are a group of uncertain position and relationships,
including rather diverse forms. They may appear as fluffy plantlike
growths often mistaken for seaweeds, especially when found dried on the
shore. Another form grows as flat hard patches encrusting seaweeds or
rocks and having a lacy appearance. Still another type is a branched and
upright growth of gelatinous texture. All of these are colonial forms or
associations of many individual polyps, all living in adjoining cells or
embedded in a unifying matrix.

The encrusting Bryozoa, or sea laces, are beautiful mosaics of closely
set compartments, each inhabited by a small tentacled creature that
superficially resembles the hydroid polyp, but possesses a complete
digestive system, a body cavity, simple nervous system, and many other
features of higher animals. The individuals of a bryozoan colony are
largely independent of each other, instead of being connected as the
hydroids are.

The Bryozoa are an ancient group dating from the Cambrian. They were
considered seaweeds by early zoologists, and later were classified as
hydroids. There are about 3000 marine species, compared with only about
35 in fresh waters.

  _Echinodermata: Starfish, Sea Urchins, Brittle Stars, Sea Cucumbers_

OF ALL the invertebrates, the echinoderms are most truly marine, for
among their nearly 5000 species not one lives in fresh water or on land.
They are an ancient group, dating from the Cambrian, but in all the
hundreds of millions of years since then none has even attempted to make
the transition to a land existence.

The earliest echinoderms were the crinoids, or sea lilies, stalked forms
that lived attached to the floor of Paleozoic seas. Some 2100 fossil
species of crinoids are known, in contrast to about 800 living species.
Today most crinoids live in East Indian waters; a few occur in the West
Indian region and come as far north as Cape Hatteras, but there are none
in the shallow waters of New England.

The common echinoderms of the shore represent the four remaining classes
of the phylum: the sea stars, the brittle and serpent stars, the sea
urchins and sand dollars, and the holothurians, or sea cucumbers. In all
members of the group there is a recurrent insistence on the number five,
many of the structures occurring in fives or multiples of five, so that
the figure is almost a symbol of the group.

The sea stars, or starfish, have flattened bodies, many in the
conventional five-pointed shape, though the number of arms varies. The
skin is roughened by hard limy plates from which short spines grow. In
most species the skin also bears structures like minute forceps on
flexible stalks (called pedicellaria); with these the animal keeps the
skin clear of sand grains and also picks off larvae of sedentary forms
that try to settle there. This is necessary because the delicate
breathing organs—soft rosettes of tissue—also project through the
skin.

Like all other echinoderms, the starfish possess a so-called
water-vascular system that functions in locomotion and secondarily in
other ways, and consists of a series of water-filled tubes running to
all parts of the body. Intake of sea water is accomplished, in starfish,
through a conspicuous perforated plate on the upper surface—the
madreporite (mother of pores). The fluid passes along the water canals
and eventually into the many short flexible tubes (tube feet) that
occupy the long grooves on the under surface of the arms. Each tube
bears a sucker at its tip. The tube feet can be lengthened or contracted
by changes of hydrostatic pressure—when extended, the suckers grip the
underlying rock or other hard surface and the animal pulls itself along.
The tube feet are used also to grip the shells of mussels or other
bivalve mollusks on which the starfish preys. As the starfish moves, any
of its various arms may go first and thus serve as temporary “head.”

In the slender, graceful brittle stars and serpent stars the arms are
not grooved and the tube feet are reduced. However, these animals
progress rapidly by writhing motions of the arms. They are active
predators and feed on a variety of small animals. Sometimes they lie in
“beds” of many hundreds of animals on the sea bottom offshore—a living
net through which scarcely any small creature can safely reach bottom.

In the sea urchins the tube feet are arranged in five avenues or rows
running from upper to lower apexes of the body, just as the meridians on
a globe run from pole to pole. The skeletal plates of the urchins are
articulated rigidly to form a globular shell, or test. The only movable
structures are the tube feet, which are thrust out through perforations
in the test, the pedicellaria, and the spines, which are mounted on
protuberances on the plates. The tube feet are retracted when the animal
is out of water, but when submerged they may be extended beyond the
spines to grasp the substratum or to capture prey. They may also perform
some sensory functions. In the various species the spines differ greatly
in length and thickness.

The mouth is on the under surface, surrounded by five white, shining
teeth used to scrape vegetation off the rocks and also to assist in
locomotion. (Although other invertebrates—e.g., the annelids—have
biting jaws, the urchins are the first to have grinding or chewing
organs.) The teeth are operated by an internally projecting apparatus of
calcareous rods and muscles known to zoologists as Aristotle’s lantern.
On the upper surface the digestive tract opens to the exterior through a
centrally placed anal pore. Around this are five petal-shaped plates,
each bearing a pore that serves to discharge eggs or sperm. The
reproductive organs are arranged in five clusters just under the upper
or dorsal surface. They are practically the only soft parts the animal
possesses and it is for these that the sea urchins are sought as human
food, especially in Mediterranean countries. Gulls hunt the urchins for
a similar purpose, often dropping them on the rocks to break the tests
so that they can eat out the soft parts.

The eggs of the sea urchins have been used extensively in biological
studies of the nature of the cell, and Jacques Loeb in 1899 used them in
a historic demonstration of artificial parthenogenesis, causing an
unfertilized egg to develop merely by treating it with chemicals or by
mechanical stimulus.

The holothurians, or sea cucumbers, are curious echinoderms with soft,
elongated bodies. They crawl on one surface with the mouth end foremost
and so have secondarily substituted a functional bilateral symmetry for
the radial symmetry characteristic of the phylum. Tube feet, where
present, are confined to three rows on the functional under surface of
the body. Some holothurians are burrowing forms, using small spicules
embedded in the body surface to grasp the surrounding mud or sand and
aid their progress. The shapes of these spicules vary with the species
and often must be studied microscopically before correct identification
can be made. The holothurians are large and abundant in tropical seas
(they are the trepang, or _bêche-de-mer_, of commerce) and in northern
waters are represented by smaller species living on offshore bottoms or
among intertidal rocks and seaweeds.

               _Mollusca: Clams, Snails, Squids, Chitons_

BECAUSE OF their endlessly varied shells, often intricately made and
beautifully adorned, some of the mollusks probably are better known than
any other animals of the shore. As a group they possess qualities
different from those of any other invertebrates, although their more
primitive members and the nature of their larvae suggest that their
remote ancestors may have resembled those of the flatworms. They have
soft, unsegmented bodies typically protected by a hard shell. One of the
most remarkable and characteristic molluscan structures is the mantle, a
cloaklike tissue that encloses the body, secretes the shell, and is
responsible for its complex structure and adornment.

The most familiar mollusks are the snail-like gastropods and the
clamlike bivalves. The most primitive mollusks are the creeping,
sluggish coat-of-mail shells, or chitons, the least-known are the tusk
shells, or scaphopods, and the most highly developed class the
cephalopods, represented by the squids.

The shells of the gastropods are univalve or in one piece, and coiled in
more or less spiral fashion. Nearly all snails are “right-handed,” that
is, the opening is to the right as it faces the observer. One of the
exceptions is the “left-handed conch,” one of the most common gastropods
of Florida beaches. Occasionally a left-handed individual occurs in a
normally right-handed species. Some gastropods have reduced the shell to
an internal remnant, as in the sea hares, or have lost it entirely, as
in the sea slugs or nudibranchs (in which, however, a coiled shell is
present in the embryo).

The snails are for the most part active animals, both the vegetarians
that move about scraping plant food from the rocks and the carnivores
that capture and devour animal prey. The sedentary boat shells, or
slipper shells, are exceptions; they attach themselves to shells or to
the sea bottom and live on diatoms strained from the water, in the
manner of oysters, clams, and other bivalves. Most snails glide about on
a flattened muscular “foot,” or they may use this same organ to burrow
into the sand. When disturbed, or at low tide, they draw back into their
shells, the opening being closed by a calcareous or horny plate called
the operculum. The shape and structure of the operculum vary greatly in
the different species and sometimes it is useful in identification. In
common with other mollusks (except the bivalves) the gastropods have a
remarkable, tooth-studded band, the radula, on the floor of the pharynx,
or, in some species, on the end of a long proboscis. The radula is used
to scrape off vegetation or to drill holes in shelled prey.

The bivalves, with few exceptions, are sedentary. Some (e.g., the
oyster) fix themselves permanently to a hard surface. Mussels and some
others anchor themselves by secreting silklike byssus threads. The
scallops and the lima clams are examples of the few bivalves that
possess the ability to swim. The razor clams have a slender pointed foot
by means of which they dig deeply and with incredible speed into the
sand or mud.

Bivalves that bury deeply in the substratum are able to do so because
they possess a long breathing tube, or siphon, through which they draw
in water and so receive oxygen and food. Although most are suspension
feeders, filtering minute food organisms from the water, some, including
the tellins and coquina clams, live on detritus that accumulates on the
sea floor. There are no carnivorous bivalves.

The shells of gastropods and bivalves are secreted by the mantle. The
basic chemical material of molluscan shells is calcium carbonate, which
forms the outer layer of calcite, and the inner layer of aragonite,
which is a heavier and harder substance although it has the same
chemical composition. Calcium phosphate and magnesium carbonate also are
contained in mollusk shells. The limy materials are laid down on an
organic matrix of conchiolin, a substance chemically allied to chitin.
The mantle contains pigment-forming cells as well as shell-secreting
cells. The rhythm of activity of these two kinds of cells results in the
marvelous sculpturing and color patterns of molluscan shells. Although
shell formation is affected by many factors in the environment and in
the physiology of the animal itself, the basic hereditary pattern is so
strongly determined that each species of mollusk has its characteristic
shell by which it may be identified.

A third class of the mollusk phylum consists of the cephalopods, so
unlike the snails and clams that superficially it is hard to reconcile
the relationship. Although ancient seas were dominated by shelled
cephalopods, all but one (the chambered nautilus) have now lost the
external shell, retaining only an inconspicuous internal remnant. One
large group, the decapods, have cylindrical bodies with ten arms; they
are represented by the squids, the ramshorn shell, and the cuttlefish.
Another group, the octopods, have baglike bodies with eight arms;
examples are the octopus and the argonaut.

The squids are strong and agile; over short distances they are probably
the swiftest animals of the sea. They swim by expelling a jet of water
through the siphon, controlling the direction of motion by pointing the
siphon forward or backward. Some of the smaller species swim in schools.
All squids are carnivorous, preying on fish, crustaceans, and various
small invertebrates. They are sought by cod, mackerel, and other large
fish, and are a favorite bait. The giant squid is the largest of all
invertebrates. The record specimen, taken on the Grand Banks of
Newfoundland, measured about 55 feet including the arms.

Octopuses are nocturnal animals and, according to those most familiar
with their habits, are timid and retiring. They live in holes or among
rocks, feeding on crabs, mollusks, and small fish. Sometimes the
location of an octopus den may be discovered by the pile of empty
mollusk shells near the entrance.

The chitons belong to a primitive order of mollusks, the Amphineura.
Most of them wear a shell consisting of eight transverse plates bounded
by a tough band, or girdle. They creep sluggishly over rocks, scraping
off vegetation. At rest, they settle into a depression, blending so well
with their surroundings that they are easily overlooked. They are sought
as food (sea beef) by West Indian natives.

The fifth class of mollusks consists of the little-known scaphopods
(tooth shells or tusk shells), which form shells resembling an
elephant’s tusk, from one to several inches long and open at both ends.
They dig into sandy bottoms, using a small, pointed foot. Some
specialists think their structure may be similar to that of the
ancestors of all mollusks. However, this is a field for speculation,
since the principal classes of mollusks were all defined early in the
Cambrian, and clues to the nature of the ancestral forms are exceedingly
vague. The tooth shells number about 200 species, and are widely
distributed in all seas. None, however, are intertidal.

                     _Chordata: Subphylum Tunicata_

THE ASCIDIANS, or sea squirts, are the most common representatives on
the shore of that interesting group of early chordates, the Tunicata. As
forerunners of the vertebrates, or backboned animals, all of the
chordates have at some time a stiffening rod of cartilaginous material,
an evolutionary forecast of the vertebral column which all the higher
animals were to possess. The adult ascidian paradoxically suggests a
creature of low and simple organization, with a physiology somewhat like
that of oysters or clams. It is only in the larva that the chordate
characteristics are clear. Though minute, the larva strongly resembles
the tadpole of a frog, possessing a notochord and a tail and swimming
actively. At the end of the larval period it settles down, becomes
attached, and undergoes metamorphosis to the much simpler adult form, in
which the chordate characters are lost. This is a curious phenomenon of
evolution, which seems to be degenerative rather than progressive, with
the larva displaying more advanced characteristics than the adult.

The adult sea squirt is shaped like a bag with two tubular openings or
siphons for water intake and outgo, and a pharynx perforated with many
slits through which water is strained. The common name refers to the
fact that when the animal is disturbed it contracts sharply, forcing
jets of water out through the siphons. In the so-called simple ascidians
the animals live as separate individuals, each enclosed in a tough
covering or test of material chemically akin to cellulose. Sand and
debris often adhere to this test, forming a mat in which the actual
shape of the animal is seldom apparent. In this form they often grow
profusely on wharf pilings, floats, and rocky ledges. In the compound,
or colonial, type of ascidian many individuals live together, embedded
in a tough gelatinous substance. Unlike a group of simple ascidians, the
various individuals of a colony are derived by asexual budding from one
individual, the founder of the colony. One of the commonest compound sea
squirts is the sea pork, Amaroucium, named from the usually gray,
gristly appearance of its colonies. These may form a thin mat on the
under side of a rock or, offshore, grow erect, forming thick slabs that
may break off and be carried in to shore. The individuals composing the
colony are not easily seen, but under a lens pits in the surface appear,
each the opening through which a single sea squirt communicates with the
outside world. In the beautiful compound sea squirt Botryllus, however,
the individuals form flowerlike clusters, easily visible.




                                 Index


_Acmaea testudinalis_, 15, 16, 58-61
_Actinopyga agassizi_, 229-230
_Agarum turneri_, 69
_Alaria esculenta_, 69-70, 71
Alcyonarians, 105-106
_Alcyonium digitatum_, 40, 105
Algae, 252-254;
  coralline (sp. _Lithothamnion_), 106-108, 119, 127, 174
  (_see also_ Seaweeds)
_Amaroucium_ sp., 53, 175
_Ammodytes americanus_, 135
Amphipods, 53, 93-95, 261
_Amphithoë rubricata_, 93-95
_Amphitrite figulus_, 66
_Anadara ovalis_, 179
_Anadara transversa_, 179
Anemone, sand (_Cerianthus americanus_), 148
  (_see also_ Sea anemone)
Angel wing (_Barnea costata_), 18, 181-182
_Anomia simplex_, 178
Anthozoans, 258
_Anurida maritima_, 74, 76, 113
_Aphrodite aculeata_, 132
_Aplysia dactylomela_, 219, 220-221, 238
Apuleius, 220
_Arca zebra_, 179
_Arenicola marina_, 132, 135, 142-143
_Argonauta argo_, 167
Aristotle, 59
Arks, 179
Arthropods, 259-263
Ascidians, 269-270
_Ascophyllum nodosum_, 15, 77-78, 79
_Asterias forbesi_, 98
_Asterias vulgaris_, 76, 97-98
_Astrophyton muricatum_, 225-227
Atlantic coast, geologic history of, 42-44, 125, 191-197;
  topography of, 43-45, 192-193
_Atrina rigida_ or _Atrina serrata_, 180
_Aurelia aurita_, 19, 86-88


_Balanus balanoides_, 79, 120-121;
  enemies, 56;
  habitat, 15-16, 31, 32-33, 40, 71;
  reproduction, 51-55
Barnacle, acorn or rock (_see Balanus balanoides_);
  gooseneck (_Lepas fascicularis_), 183-185
_Barnea costata_, 18, 181-182
Barracuda, 238
Basket star (_Astrophyton muricatum_), 225-227
Beach fauna, 152-164
Beach flea (_Talorchestia longicornis_), 19, 161-163
Bears Bluff, 187
_Bêche-de-mer_, 229
Bird Shoal, 133, 146
“Black sands,” 127
Black zone of shore, 46-47
Blackfish, 173
Blenny, beach-hopping, 210
Boat shell (_Crepidula fornicata_), 178-179
Boreal zone, 24-25
_Botryllus schlosseri_, 17, 67-68
_Brevoortia tyrannus_, 24
Bristle worms, 115, 258-259
Brittle star, 265;
  daisy (_Ophiopholis aculeata_), 65-66, 101;
  West Indian (_Ophiocoma echinata_), 224
Bryozoans, 65, 92-93, 96, 121, 174, 263
_Buccinum undatum_, 109
_Busycon canaliculatum_, 150-152, 182
_Busycon carica_, 150-152, 182
By-the-wind sailor (_Velella mutica_), 169-170
Byssus cord, 16, 101, 178, 179, 180-181, 186


_Callianassa stimpsoni_, 132, 140-142
_Callinectes sapidus_, 135
_Cancer borealis_, 99-100
Cape Cod, 22, 23, 24
Cape Hatteras, 21
Cape Lookout, 145-146
_Carcinides maenas_, 23, 81
Cardinal fish, 232
_Cardisoma guanhumi_, 245
_Caretta caretta_, 236-237
Cask shell (_Tonna galea_), 231, 237
Cat’s eye, 182
_Cerianthus americanus_, 148
_Cerithidea costata_, 7, 208
_Chaetopterus variopedatus_, 134-135, 148-149
_Chelonia mydas_, 236-237
Chiton, 269;
  West Indian (_Chiton tuberculatus_), 208-209
_Chondrus crispus_, 32, 63, 95-103
_Cistenides gouldi_, 143-145
Clam, bloody (_Anadara ovalis_), 179;
  coquina (_Donax variabilis_), 156-157;
  razor, 151;
  red-nose or rock-borer (_Hiatella arctica_), 66-67;
  soft-shell (_Mya arenaria_), 24, 80, 81
Clam worm (_Nereis virens_), 80
_Clava leptostyla_, 85-86
Cloth of gold, 180-181
_Clupea harengus_, 23-24
_Clypeaster subdepressus_, 236
Cod (_Gadus callarias_), 25
Coelenterates, 255-256
_Coenobita clypeatus_, 244-245
Coffee-bean shell (_Melampus bidentatus_), 244
Comb jelly (_Pleurobrachia pileus_ or _Mnemiopsis leidyi_), 111
Conch, 236;
  fighting (_Strombus alatus_), 231;
  horse (_Pleuroploca gigantea_), 237;
  king crown or common crown (_Melongena corona_), 237;
  queen (_Strombus gigas_), 231-233
Coral, 191-192, 198, 200-202, 203, 247, 256
Coral coast, intertidal life, 206-215
Coral reef flats, life of, 215
Coral reefs, life of, 198-206
Coralline algae (sp. _Lithothamnion_), 106-108, 119, 127, 174
Cowfish (_Lacophrys trigonus_), 231, 236
Crab, blue (_Callinectes sapidus_), 135;
  fiddler (_Uca pugilator_, _Uca pugnax_), 146, 243-244;
  gall (_Cryptochirus corallicola_), 202;
  ghost (_Ocypode albicans_), 5, 19, 157-161;
  green (_Carcinides maenas_), 23, 81;
  hermit, 208;
  hermit, purple-clawed (_Coenobita clypeatus_), 244-245;
  horseshoe (_Limulus polyphemus_), 19, 133, 147, 262-263;
  Jonah (_Cancer borealis_), 99-100;
  mole (_Emerita talpoida_), 19, 135, 153-156;
  pea (_Pinnixa chaetopterana_), 142, 149-150, 180;
  spider (_Stenorynchus seticornis_), 236;
  stone (_Menippe mercenaria_), 151;
  white (_Cardisoma guanhumi_), 245
_Crepidula fornicata_, 178-179
_Cryptochirus corallicola_, 202
Ctenophore, 256-257 (_see also_ Comb jelly)
_Cucumaria frondosa_, 102, 227-229
Currents, relation to shore life, 18-27
Cuvier, 167
_Cyanea capillata_, 19, 88-89
_Cymodocea manitorum_, 230
_Cyphoma gibbosum_, 202-203


_Diadema antillarum_, 222-223
Diatoms, 252
_Diopatra cupraea_, 132, 150
Dodecaceria, 176
_Donax variabilis_, 156-157
Duke University, 173
Dulse, 57, 63


Echinoderms, 263-266
_Echinometra lucunter_, 213-214
Ectocrines, 36
Eels, rock (_Pholis gunnellus_), 102-103;
  sand or launce (_Ammodytes americanus_), 135
_Emerita talpoida_, 19, 135, 153-156
_Enteromorpha intestinalis_, 111
Equatorial Current, 26
_Erectmochelys imbricata_, 236-237
_Etrumeus sadina_, 24
_Eucidaris tribuloides_, 223
_Eunice fucata_, 204-206
Evolution toward land life, examples of:
  beach flea, 161-162;
  coffee-bean shell, 244;
  ghost crab, 157-160;
  periwinkles, 7, 50-51;
  hermit crab, 245;
  white crab, 245


_Fasciolaria bunteria_, 148, 182
_Fierasfer bermudaensis_, 229-230
“Fireworms,” 204-206
Florida Keys, geologic history, 191-197;
  life of, 197-247;
  sands, 129-130
Flotsam, shells in, 177-183;
  strays found in, 164-173
_Flustrella hispida_, 93, 121
Foraminifera, 127, 128
Fossil records, 9-10
_Fucus edentatus_, 15
_Fucus spiralis_, 77
_Fucus vesiculosis_, 77-78


_Gadus callarias_, 25
Geologic history of Atlantic seacoast, 42-44, 125, 191-197
Gerard, John, 184-185
_Gigartina stellata_, 92
Glauconite, 127, 128
_Gorgonia flabellum_, 202
Gorgonians, 199;
  _Leptogorgia_ sp., 174;
  _Pterogorgia acerosa_, 202-203;
  _Xiphigorgia anceps_, 202-203
Grasses, sea, 148, 230-231;
  inhabitants of, 231-238
Gray snapper, 238
Gulf Stream, 21-22, 25-26
Gulls, 39, 40, 109, 112-113, 152, 157


_Halichondria panicea_, 17, 103, 119
Hawk Channel, 192, 198, 236
_Henricia sanguinolenta_, 25, 99
Herring, round (_Etrumeus sadina_), 24;
  sea (_Clupea harengus_), 23-24, 25
_Hiatella arctica_, 66-67
Hibernation of shore animals, 19, 156, 161
_Hippocampus hudsonius_, 234-235
Holdfasts, laminarian, inhabitants of, 64-71
Holothurians, 227-230, 266
  (_see also_ Sea cucumber)
Horn shell (_Cerithidea costata_), 7, 208
Horny corals (_see_ Gorgonians)
Horse conch (_Pleuroploca gigantea_), 237
Horse mussel (_Volsella modiolus_), 66, 100-103
Hydroid, club-headed (_Clava leptostyla_), 85-86;
  pink-hearted (_Tubularia crocea_), 4, 106;
  sertularian (_Sertularia pumila_), 115-117
Hydroids, 19, 35, 174, 255-256


Irish moss (_Chondrus crispus_), 32, 63;
  inhabitants of, 95-103


_Janthina janthina_, 168-169
Jellyfish, red or arctic (_Cyanea capillata_), 19, 88-89;
  white or moon jelly (_Aurelia aurita_), 19, 86-88
Jingle shell (_Anomia simplex_), 178
Jupiter Inlet, 21


Kelp, 17, 64;
  arctic, 25;
  horsetail (_Laminaria digitata_), 64, 71;
  long-stalked (_Laminaria longicruris_), 70;
  sugar (_Laminaria saccharina_), 70;
  winged (_Alaria esculenta_), 69-70, 71


_Lactophrys trigonus_, 231, 236
_Laminaria digitata_, 64, 71
_Laminaria longicruris_, 70
_Laminaria saccharina_, 70
Laminarian seaweeds, 25, 64-71
Laver, purple (_Porphyra umbilicalis_), 62
_Leathesia difformis_, 62
_Lepas fascicularis_, 183-185
_Lepidonotus squamatus_, 66, 101
_Leucosolenia botryoides_, 122
Lichen, bearded (_Usnea barbata_), 41;
  wall (_Thelochistes parietinus_), 46
_Ligia exotica_, 207
Limpet (_Acmaea testudinalis_), 15, 16, 58-61
_Limulus polyphemus_, 19, 133, 147
_Linkia guildingii_, 224
_Lithophaga bisulcata_, 18, 174
_Lithothamnion_ sp., 106-108, 119, 127, 174
_Littorina angulifera_, 7
_Littorina littorea_, 50, 58, 97
_Littorina neritoides_, 33
_Littorina obtusata_, 50, 83-84
_Littorina saxatilis_, 15, 47-51
Lobster, spiny (_Panulirus argus_), 238
Lugworm (_Arenicola marina_), 132, 135, 142-143
_Luidea clathrata_, 140
_Lunatia heros_, 131, 134, 149, 182-183


Manatee grass (_Cymodocea manitorum_), 230
Mangrove (_Rhizophora mangle_), 194, 239-247
Mannitol, 70
Marl, 18, 173, 176
_Martesia cuneiformis_, 187
_Melampus bidentatus_, 244
_Mellita testudinata_, 132, 138-139
_Melongena corona_, 237
_Membranipora pilosa_, 92, 96
Menhaden (_Brevoortia tyrannus_), 24
_Menippe mercenaria_, 151
_Merluccius bilinearis_, 24
_Metridium dianthus_, 40, 103-105, 119-120
Miami oölite, 196
_Microporella ciliata_, 96
Minnows, salt-water, 135
_Mnemiopsis leidyi_, 111
_Moira atropos_, 132, 139
Mollusks, 266-269
Monhegan Island, 14, 42
Moon, influence on tides, 29;
  on vegetation, 35-36
Moon jelly (_Aurelia aurita_), 19, 86-88
Moon snail (_Polinices duplicatus_ or _Lunatia heros_), 131, 134, 179,
  182-183
Mount Desert Island, 43-44
Murlin (_Alaria esculenta_), 69-70, 71
Mussel, common or blue (_Mytilus edulis_), 16, 120-121;
  enemies of, 57;
  habitat and life cycle, 79, 89-92;
  and Sertularians, 115-117
Mussel, date (_Lithophaga bisulcata_), 18, 174
Mussel, horse (_Volsella modiolus_), 66, 100-103
_Mya arenaria_, 24, 80, 81
Myrtle Beach, 175-176
_Mytilus edulis_ (_see_ Mussel, common or blue)


Nautilus, paper (_Argonauta argo_), 167
Needlefish (_Tylosura raphidoma_), 239
Nemerteans, 115, 257-258
Nereid worms, 35, 75-76, 80, 259
_Nereis virens_, 80
Nerite (_Nerita peloronta_ or _Nerita versicolor_), 207-208
_Noetia ponderosa_, 179
_Nomeus gronovii_, 172


Oarweeds, 64, 70
Octopus (_Octopus vulgaris_), 176, 231
_Ocypode albicans_, 5, 19, 157-161
Old man’s beard (_Usnea barbata_), 41
_Onchidium floridanum_, 209-211
Oölitic limestone, 196
Opercula, 181-182
_Ophiocoma echinata_, 133
_Ophiopholis aculeata_, 65-66, 101
_Oreaster reticulatus_, 223-224
Ostracods, 115, 260
_Ostrea frons_, 243
Oysters, 35-36;
  larval, 33-34;
  mangrove (_Ostrea frons_), 243;
  pearl (_Pteria colymbus_), 175


Palolo worm, Atlantic (_Eunice fucata_), 204-206
_Panulirus argus_, 238
Parchment worm (_Chaetopterus variopedatus_), 134-135, 148-149
Pearl fish (_Fierasfer bermudaensis_), 229-230
Pen shell (_Atrina rigida_ or _Atrina serrata_), 180
Periwinkle, beaded (_Tectarius muricatus_), 208;
  common (_Littorina littorea_), 50, 58, 97;
  European rock (_Littorina neritoides_), 33;
  mangrove (_Littorina angulifera_), 7;
  rough or rock (_Littorina saxatilis_), 15, 47-51;
  smooth (_Littorina obtusata_), 50, 83-84
_Petaloconchus_, 212-213
_Phaeophyceae_, 76, 253
_Pholis gunnellus_, 102-103
_Physalia pelagica_, 169-173
Piddock, wood (_Martesia cuneiformis_), 187
_Pinnixa chaetopterana_, 142, 149-150, 180
Pipefish (_Syngnathus_ sp.), 233-234
Platyhelminths, 257
_Pleurobrachia pileus_, 111
_Pleuroploca gigantea_, 237
Pliny, 220
Plumed worm (_Diopatra cupraea_), 132, 150
_Polinices duplicatus_, 131, 134, 179, 182-183
_Polysiphonia lanosa_, 80
Ponderous ark (_Noetia ponderosa_), 179
_Porphyra umbilicalis_, 62
Portuguese man-of-war (_Physalia pelagica_), 169-173
Pourtalès Plateau, 199
Protophytes, 251
Protozoans, 251-253
Purple sail (_Velella mutica_), 169-170
Purpurin, 56, 57


Radula, dog whelk, 56;
  limpet, 60-61;
  periwinkle, 50
_Ralfsia verrucosa_, 114-115
Ramshorn shell (_Spirula spirula_), 165-166
Red tides, 37
Redi, 220
_Renilla reniformis_, 136-138
_Rhizophora mangle_, 194, 239-247
_Rhodymenia palmata_, 57, 63
Ribbon worms, 80, 115, 257-258
Rock tripe (_Umbilicaria_ sp.), 46
Rocks as records of history, 9-10
Rockweed (_see_ Wrack)
Rocky shores, life of, 38-128


Sand, fauna of, 130-189;
  types of, 125-130
Sand anemone (_Cerianthus americanus_), 148
Sand dollar (_Mellita testudinata_), 132, 138-139
Sand hopper (_see_ Beach flea)
Sangamon interglacial period, 194-195
Sanibel Island, 177, 179, 180
Scale worm (_Lepidonotus squamatus_), 66, 101
Scaphanders, 26
Screwshell snail (Terebra), 157
Scyphozoans, 256
Sea anemone, arctic, 25;
  plumose (_Metridium dianthus_), 40, 103-105, 119-120
Sea birds, 4-5, 6 (_see also_ Gulls)
Sea biscuit (_Clypeaster subdepressus_), 236
Sea bottle (_Valonia macrophysa_), 211
Sea colander (_Agarum turneri_), 69
Sea cucumber, 227-229;
  northern (_Cucumaria frondosa_), 102;
  West Indian (_Actinopyga agassizi_), 229-230
Sea fan (_Gorgonia flabellum_), 202
Sea finger (_Alcyonium digitatum_), 40, 105
Sea grape (_Molgula manhattensis_), 68
Sea grasses, 148, 230-231;
  inhabitants of, 148-151, 231-238
Sea hare (_Aplysia dactylomela_), 219, 220-221, 238
Sea horse (_Hippocampus hudsonius_), 234-235
Sea lace (_Membranipora pilosa_), 92, 96;
  (_Microporella ciliata_), 96
Sea mat (_Flustrella hispida_), 93, 121
Sea moss (_see_ Irish moss)
Sea mouse (_Aphrodite aculeata_), 132
Sea pansy (_Renilla reniformis_), 136-138
Sea pens, 137
Sea pork (_Amaroucium_ sp.), 53, 175
Sea potato (_Leathesia difformis_), 62
Sea roach (_Ligia exotica_), 207
Sea spider, 121
Sea squirts, 3, 68, 175
Sea star (_Oreaster reticulatus_), 223-224
Sea tangle (_Laminaria saccharina_), 64, 70
Sea turtles, green (_Chelonia mydas_), 236-237;
  hawksbill (_Erectmochelys imbricata_), 236-237;
  loggerhead (_Caretta caretta_), 236-237
Sea urchins, 35, 223, 265;
  green (_Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis_), 17, 25, 96, 102, 108-109;
  heart (_Moira atropos_), 132, 139;
  keyhole (_Mellita testudinata_), 138-139;
  long-spined (_Diadema antillarum_), 222-223;
  rock-boring (_Echinometra lucunter_), 213-214;
  slate-pencil (_Eucidaris tribuloides_), 223
Sea vase (_Ciona intestinalis_), 68
Sea whip (_see_ Gorgonians)
Seaweeds, exposed coast, 61-71;
  sheltered coast, 71-79 (_see also_ Irish moss _and_ Wrack)
Seed plants, 148, 230-231, 240-241
_Sertularia pumila_, 115-117
Shackleford Shoals, 177
Shipworm (_Teredo navalis_), 185-187
Shoals, fauna of, 147-152
Shrimp, 76;
  ghost (_Callianassa stimpsoni_), 132, 140-142;
  mantis (_Squilla empusa_), 24;
  snapping (_Synalpheus brooksi_), 217-219
Siphonophores, 169-173
Skates, 182
Slipper shell (_Crepidula fornicata_), 178-179
Snail, banded tulip shell (_Fasciolaria hunteria_), 148, 182;
  flamingo-tongue (_Cyphoma gibbosum_), 202-203;
  moon or sand collar (_Polinices duplicatus_ or _Lunatia heros_), 131,
    134, 179, 182-183;
  nerite (_Nerita peloranta_ or _Nerita versicolor_), 207-208;
  screw-shell (_Terebra_), 157;
  vermetid (_Petaloconchus_), 212-213;
  violet (_Janthina janthina_), 168-169 (_see also_ Periwinkle _and_
    Whelk)
Snellius, 186
Soft coral (_Alcyonium digitatum_), 40, 105
Sphaerella, 113
_Spheciospongia vesparia_, 216-219
_Spirorbis borealis_, 58, 81-83
_Spirula spirula_, 165-166
Sponge, 174, 203;
  crumb-of-bread (_Halichondria panicea_), 17, 103, 119, 123;
  _Leucosolenia botryoides_, 122;
  loggerhead (_Spheciospongia vesparia_), 216-219;
  sulphur (_Cliona celata_), 199
Squids, 268-269
_Squilla empusa_, 24
Starfish, 109, 264-265;
  blood-red (_Henricia sanguinolenta_), 25, 99;
  common (_Asterias forbesi_), 76, 176;
  giant (_Oreaster reticulatus_), 223-224;
  _Linkia guildingii_, 224;
  _Luidea clathrata_, 140;
  northern (_Asterias vulgaris_), 97-99
_Stenorynchus seticornis_, 236
Sting ray, 239
_Strombus alatus_, 231
_Strombus gigas_, 231-233
_Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis_, 17, 25, 96, 102, 108-109
Surf zone, 14-15;
  dwellers in, 15-18
_Synalpheus brooksi_, 217-219
_Syngnathus_ sp., 233-234


_Talorchestia longicornis_, 19, 161-163
_Tectarius muricatus_, 208
Tellin, rose (_Tellina lineata_), 6
Temperature, and climatic change, 23;
  and effects on sea life, 18-21;
  influence of ocean currents on, 21-22
Ten Thousand Islands, 26, 132, 245, 246
_Terebra_, 157
_Teredo navalis_, 185-187
_Thais lapillus_, 45, 56-58
_Thalassia testudinum_, 26, 215, 230, 231, 233, 235
Thallophytes, 253-254
_Thelochistes parietinus_, 46
Tidal zones of life, 13, 21, 30-33, 46-110, 206-215
Tide-pool insect (_Anurida maritima_), 74, 76, 113
Tide pools, 110-123
Tides and biological rhythm, 27;
  effects on reproduction, 32-36;
  neap, 29;
  range on Atlantic coast, 30;
  semi-diurnal rhythm of, 30;
  spring, 29, 103
Toadfish, 147
_Tonna galea_, 231, 237
Transverse ark (_Anadara transversa_), 179
Trepang, 229
Trumpet worm (_Cistenides gouldi_), 143-145
Tube-building worms, 34, 81-83, 143-145, 148-150, 174
_Tubularia crocea_, 4, 106
Tulip shell, banded (_Fasciolaria hunteria_), 148, 182
Tunicate, golden-star (_Botryllus schlosseri_), 17, 67-68
Turkey wing (_Arca zebra_), 179
Turtle grass (_Thalassia testudinum_), 26, 215, 230, 231, 233, 235
Turtles, green, hawksbill, loggerhead, 236-237
_Tylosura raphidoma_, 239
Tyrian purple, 56


_Uca pugilator_ and _Uca pugnax_, 146, 243-244
_Umbilicaria_ sp., 46
_Usnea barbata_, 41


_Valonia macrophysa_, 211
_Velella mutica_, 169-170
Vermetid snails (_Petaloconchus_ and _Vermicularia_), 212-213
Violet snail (_Janthina janthina_), 168-169
_Volsella modiolus_, 66, 100-103


Whelk, 132;
  channeled (_Busycon canaliculatum_), 150-152, 182;
  common (_Buccinum undatum_), 109;
  dog (_Thais lapillus_), 45, 56-58;
  knobbed (_Busycon carica_), 150-152, 182
“White water,” 197
Whiting (_Merluccius bilinearis_), 24
Wood piddock (_Martesia cuneiformis_), 187
“Worm rock,” 176-177, 212
Wrack, 15, 40, 72-79;
  bladder (_Fucus vesiculosis_), 77-78;
  channeled (_Pelvetia canaliculata_), 76-77;
  forked (_Fucus edentatus_), 15;
  knotted (_Ascophyllum nodosum_), 15, 77-78, 79;
  spiral (_Fucus spiralis_), 77


_Zoanthus sociatus_, 214-215
Zones of life, tidal, 13, 21, 30-33, 46-110, 206-215




                           TRANSCRIBER NOTES

Misspelled words and printer errors have been corrected. Where multiple
spellings occur, majority use has been employed including: low-tide to
low tide, high-tide to high tide, and ebb-tide to ebb tide.

Punctuation has been maintained except where obvious printer errors
occur.

Because of copyright considerations, the illustrations by Bob Hines
(1912-1994) have been omitted from this ebook.

A cover was created for this eBook and is placed in the public domain.

[The end of _The Edge of the Sea_ by Rachel Carson]
