 * A Distributed Proofreaders Canada eBook * 

This eBook is made available at no cost and with very few restrictions.
These restrictions apply only if (1) you make a change in the eBook
(other than alteration for different display devices), or (2) you are
making commercial use of the eBook. If either of these conditions
applies, please contact a https   fadedpage  administrator before
proceeding. Thousands more FREE eBooks are available at
https   fadedpage .

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be under copyright
in some countries. If you live outside Canada, check your country's
copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER COPYRIGHT IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT
DOWNLOAD OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE.

 Title   The Lost Valley
 Date of first publication   1922
 Author   Frederick Schiller Faust (as John Frederick) (1892-1944)
 Date first posted   Aug. 4, 2019
 Date last updated   Aug. 4, 2019
Faded Page eBook #20190811

This eBook was produced by  Al Haines, Cindy Beyer & the online
Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at https   pgdpcanada.net





                          [Cover Illustration]




               Other books by Max Brand  
               THE FUGITIVE’S MISSION 
               THE SURVIVAL OF JUAN ORO 
               THE GAUNTLET 
               STOLEN GOLD 
               THE WOLF STRAIN 
               MEN BEYOND THE LAW 
               BEYOND THE OUTPOSTS 
               THE STONE THAT SHINES 
               THE OATH OF OFFICE 
               DUST ACROSS THE RANGE/THE CROSS BRAND 
               THE ROCK OF KIEVER 
               SOFT METAL 
               THUNDER MOON AND THE SKY PEOPLE 
               RED WIND AND THUNDER MOON 
               THE LEGEND OF THUNDER MOON 
               THE QUEST OF LEE GARRISON 
               SAFETY McTEE 
               TWO SIXES 
               SIXTEEN IN NOME 
               THE ABANDONED OUTLAW 
               SLUMBER MOUNTAIN 
               THE LIGHTNING WARRIOR 
               OUTLAWS ALL 
               THE ONE-WAY TRAIL 
               THE BELLS OF SAN CARLOS 
               THE SACKING OF EL DORADO 
               THE DESERT PILOT/VALLEY OF JEWELS 
               THE RETURN OF FREE RANGE LANNING 
               FREE RANGE LANNING 
               WOODEN GUNS 
               KING CHARLIE 
               RED DEVIL OF THE RANGE 
               PRIDE OF TYSON 
               DONNEGAN 
               THE OUTLAW TAMER 
               BULL HUNTER’S ROMANCE 
               BULL HUNTER 
               TIGER MAN 
               GUN GENTLEMEN 
               THE MUSTANG HERDER 
               WESTERN TOMMY 
               SPEEDY 
               THE WHITE WOLF 
               TROUBLE IN TIMBERLINE 
               RIDERS OF THE SILENCES 
               TIMBAL GULCH TRAIL 
               THE BELLS OF SAN FILIPO 
               MARBLEFACE 




                                  MAX 
                                 BRAND 


                               THE  LOST 
                                 VALLEY 




         “The Lost Valley” first appeared under the title “The 
          Emerald Trail” by John Frederick in Street & Smith’s 
                   Western Story Magazine  (2/25/22). 

         Copyright © 1922 by Street & Smith Publications, Inc. 




                                CONTENTS

                        I. Burning Money
                       II. The Need for Action
                      III. Chalmers is Surprised
                       IV. The Lure of Combat
                        V. Instinctive Distrust
                       VI. At the Harvey Ranch
                      VII. Chuck Rides Alone
                     VIII. The Man on the Gray
                       IX. Purchass Takes a Hand
                        X. A Girl’s Fear
                       XI. The Wolf Exposed
                      XII. Kate’s Answer




                                   I
                             “BURNING MONEY”


When it happened, there were divided opinions. Some said that beginners
have luck. Others declared that the devil takes care of his own. And
last of all the cynics nodded their heads and admitted—old miner, old
fool. But when all the talking was ended, the fact remained that the man
who struck pay dirt and started the wild gold-rush was young Billy
Neilan, far better and more widely known as Chuck.

Of course, there was no reason in the world why Chuck should have struck
it rich. He knew infinitely more about ropes and branding irons than he
did about “color” and the ways of getting at it. He knew vastly more
about poker than he knew about ropes and irons. And he knew far, far
more about guns than he knew about poker. In fact, work was never a
thing that troubled Chuck Neilan. What sent him out prospecting was
simply the fact that he had never prospected before. And the third day
he made the strike.

With typically careless exuberance, he took a well-to-do miner up to the
claim and offered to sell out for five thousand dollars. But a miracle
happened. The miner was too rich to be dishonest—at least, dishonest to
 that  extent. He merely bought a half interest, and he paid for that
half interest four times the price for which Chuck had stipulated to
sell his entire share in the claim.

Twelve hours later a big gang of laborers was tearing into the
mountainside and opening up the treasures of The Roanoke Queen. But
Chuck Neilan was not on hand to watch the proceedings. He had swung his
lithe body onto a vicious pinto and spurred the tough little beast
toward town, for in Chuck’s pocket was a stuffed wallet that rubbed
against his ribs. And in the wallet the stuffing consisted of greenbacks
of large denominations totaling twenty thousand dollars that clamored
with eagerness to be spent.

All the way down the trail the thirst of Chuck, brought to a fine edge
by the drought of Prohibition days, increased in sharpness. It became a
consuming fire in time, and he struck the town of Sitting Bull like a
whirlwind seeking action.

Sitting Bull was not a quiet, pastoral village. The epidermis of that
community had been thickened by many a perilous year of existence in
gold-rush times and out of them. The town had seen riots beyond number,
and in the early term of its life it had regularly burned to the ground
three times a year. Among the old-timers in that city were men whose
names had rung and echoed up and down the length of the mountain desert,
and yet the hardiest of these looked askance with the expression of men
who feel that a storm is about to break when the rattle of hoofs and the
whooping voice tore past the window.

“What young fool is that?” they would ask.

“It ain’t no fool. It’s Chuck Neilan,” would be the answer of him who
went to look. Soon as that answer was received, men looked to one
another foolishly, pushed hats back on heads, and scratched
speculatively, then looked to their guns.

Not that Chuck Neilan was a bully or a fight picker. By no means. If he
had been, he must inevitably have left a red trail behind him during the
first year or two of his vigorous manhood and come to a quick end
himself. But, as a matter of fact, Chuck was the best-natured man who
ever loved a fight from the bottom of his heart. He was very, very
partial to fist fighting, but where his ability was known and some burly
fellow wished to close and rough it, Chuck was perfectly willing to
accommodate the hardiest of them in a whirl at rough-and-tumble. He
would, much against his will, meet the desires of those who wished knife
work. But the special domain, the  sanctum sanctorum  of Chuck, was gun
play. He looked upon it not as a means of killing enemies and defending
one’s life. It was not that to Chuck. It was, above all, an art.

Chuck would talk with a hushed voice and subdued manner about the grace
with which one fellow handled a gun, about the neatness of another, and
about the speed of a third. Those were, as may be seen, the three chief
articles in his creed  speed, neatness, and grace. He would hold forth
at length upon the degree of polish that various gunfighters in the
mountains possessed. As a matter of fact, he stood apart and above the
rest of them, and he was recognized for his skill.

As has been said before, he was not a bully. Like all men who truly love
battle, the only manner of battle in which he rejoiced was fair fight
with no odds except on the side opposed to him. Nothing could induce him
to attack a man smaller than himself, even though pushed to the wall in
self-defense, and he had been known to back out of a room and literally
take water rather than lay one of his formidable hands upon some
obstreperous youth not yet familiar with the uses of a razor.

Indeed, as the reputation of Chuck Neilan spread and his formidable
qualities became well known, he fell into a dearth of trouble, in spite
of the maxim about those who hunt for it. Hardboiled battlers avoided
him like poison, and law-abiding citizens would by no means risk their
necks to subdue a noise maker who, as they were perfectly well aware,
had not an ounce of malice in his entire make-up. Yet, although one may
be perfectly sure that the lightning will not strike, it often serves to
make the cheek change color and the eye grow smaller. Such was the
effect of the advent of Chuck Neilan upon even the hardy citizens of
Sitting Bull.

He galloped past with a whoop and a cloud of dust, and in the course of
the day he plunged into and emerged from three separate parties built
around various and sundry proportions of moonshine red-eye. Behold him,
therefore, in the early evening striding down the streets of Sitting
Bull with the carriage of a wavering reed in the wind and steps as
irregular as the first halting paces of a child. His eye, however,
remained clear, his voice steady, though somewhat shrill, and, when it
was not necessary for him to move about, few would have guessed that he
was inebriated, except for the reddened brilliance of his glance.

Of course, a crowd gathered around him. It spread behind like the tail
behind a comet. If he sang, they echoed him in a chorus. If he halted,
they halted likewise. Most of them were mean spirits who hungered to
pick up a few wild tales to tell about the latest coming of this
celebrity to Sitting Bull. Those who were actually his friends dared not
argue with him about his course of action. For Chuck Neilan was very,
very averse to meeting argument from a sturdy, full-grown man. He liked
to have such arguments expressed in actions rather than words, and his
preferences being well known, his friends gave him a wide swath when he
started on a rampage. For that matter, none of the crowd was at all
disposed to cross him in the least of his whims. And, though a halting,
old woman came in his path and shook her cane at him and rated him
soundly and passed quite unscathed in spite of her rashness, there was
no stalwart man who would not rather have signed his own death warrant
than have taken such action.

So, when he whirled suddenly and with an imperious gesture bade them
scatter, they obeyed at once and fled to the four corners of the street
like leaves before the wind. Chuck Neilan, staggering and laughing as he
watched them flee, now turned again and pursued his uncertain way until
a flare of light and a well-remembered window brought him to an abrupt
halt in the middle of the block. It was the pawnbroker’s window. There
in the very center stood the most brilliant decoration of all, the
silver-and-gold mounted saddle which, since his earliest recollections,
had always shone in that window, apparently a fixture there for
eternity, and far too beautiful for actual use. Many and many a dream
had seen him seated in that saddle, rushing against onleaping hordes of
Indians perhaps, or prancing through the center of this same street with
familiar faces on either side.

He gazed on it now with his heart beating in his throat. Impossible to
most perhaps, but nothing was impossible to a man who had twenty
thousand dollars struggling to burn a way out of his wallet and again
enjoy the air of a free circulation from hand to hand. Chuck lingered
only in order to note that the gold spurs were also there beside the
saddle, and then he turned and plunged through the door and into the
cobwebbed silence of the shop.

That silence, the warmth, and the lack of fresh air caused the excited
brain of Chuck Neilan to spin for a moment. His brain cleared as he saw
through the cloud the familiar countenance of Mr. Isaac Sylvester. The
first Sylvester had founded this pawnshop. The second Sylvester, who was
the man who now confronted Chuck with his big hands spread palms down on
the top of the glass-covered case, had carried on the same business. The
first Sylvester was lean; the second Sylvester was broad. His face was a
triangle. The base was the enormous breadth of his jowls. The apex was
the stubborn tuft of hair that jutted out at the top of his narrowing
forehead. His mouth was a shapeless slit. His nose was a pudgy mass made
distinguishable only by the flaring, fishhook nostrils. His eyebrows
darted out in the shape familiar to those who have seen a Mephistopheles
made up for the stage. Under them were little, beady, black eyes that
could glitter with complacence, shine with piercing distrust, or glow
invitingly. They glowed in this manner at the newcomer, though a spot of
white appeared in the exact center of each of Sylvester’s cheeks. The
cowpuncher-miner looked over the pawnbroker with intense distrust and
dislike.

“Well, Sylvester,” he said, “how come?”

“Fair . . . only fair,” protestingly responded Sylvester, turning his
hands palms up and shrugging shoulders that seemed capable of lifting a
ton’s weight. “Times ain’t what they used to be when my father was
running things.”

“Huh,” said Chuck, and made a wry face. Then he swallowed the ideas that
came storming to his teeth.

“That saddle there in the window,” he said. “How much?”

The glance of Sylvester flickered to the saddle and back at the face of
Chuck Neilan. By the step with which Chuck approached, he now saw that
the man was drunk, very drunk. But would it be wise to cheat him,
nevertheless? Other men had cheated Mr. Neilan on occasion, and they had
not lived long to boast of their cleverness. In reality, Sylvester hated
Chuck more than he feared him. He had long promised himself that, if he
could ever lay hands on the formidable cowpuncher, one crunching grip of
his massive fingers would serve to end the battle before it was well
begun. But the trouble was that, while he was reaching for his man,
many, many things might happen. Sylvester looked again at the saddle and
moistened his dry lips. And the heart of the cheat in him was dry also
as a desert calling for rain.

“That saddle,” he declared, “is all gold work and silver work and
leather work made by hand, Mister Neilan.”

“When you call me Mister Neilan,” Chuck said, grinning, “I know you’re
going to boost the price on me. How much, I say?”

The pawnbroker burst into perspiration. “It cost two thousand to make,”
he said and glanced at it aside. It was rotted with time. It was not
worth, now, more than the value of the ornaments—say three or four
hundred dollars.

“Two thousand?”

“But time has brought it down some,” said Sylvester, seeing a tremendous
profit in the grip of his fingers, and hardly daring to close them over
the bargain. “Down to about eighteen hundred . . . or . . . seeing it’s
you . . . sixteen hundred dollars, Chuck.”

In agony he had brought down the price that four hundred dollars, and
now his brain reeled as he heard the tall man say  “Dirt cheap,
Sylvester. Dirt cheap. That ol’ saddle’s mine. Trot it out. Trot it
out!”

Weak with the conviction that the entire two thousand would have been
paid without demure, the pawnbroker staggered to the window and
returned, carrying the saddle. It was flashing enough and brilliant
enough to make an eye-catching window display, but the leather was
either warped or rotted out of all semblance to a saddle.

“I’ll throw in the blankets,” he declared generously, and he swathed the
saddle at once in a great sheeting of wool. Then he breathed more
easily. The hungry eyes of Chuck, the eyes of one intent on purchasing,
were still wandering about unsatisfied.

“I seen a pair of gold spurs out in that window,” he said. “Maybe . . .
?”

The spurs were instantly produced and turned back and forth in the fat
hands of the broker, so that the light would catch on them and gleam. A
price was named and instantly taken. The crisp bank notes once again
rustled on the top of the glass case. The spurs were wrapped and became
the property of the miner.

“Now,” said Sylvester, “what d’you think of these?” And under the eyes
of Chuck he slid a tray of diamonds.

There was no satisfactory light in the pawnshop, but from the two lamps
sufficient radiance fell to make the tray come instantly awash with
light, and Sylvester manipulated it slightly back and forth—just a bare
fraction of an inch, so that the gems might have the better chance to
scintillate. While his hand worked, his brain worked with tenfold speed,
estimating how high he might boost the price on each diamond. To his
dismay the other was shaking his head.

“Never took to diamonds much,” he declared. “Just as soon have a bunch
of old junk glass, pretty near. I like color, son, and lots of it.”

Inspiration descended upon Sylvester. The tray of diamonds disappeared
with the speed and many of the other properties of light, and in its
place a second tray was produced, burning with the colors of a
sunset—rubies, emeralds, topaz, pearls, none of them in any remarkable
size, but all in such numbers that the color effect instantly charmed
the eye. Hundreds of Mexicans had left this wealth here in exchange for
gold. And many and many a gaudy scarf pin had been despoiled to increase
the tray in Sylvester’s shop. He looked upon it now with a sad sort of
satisfaction. It was his particular hobby, this collection. He would
almost as soon keep the tray as sell anything from it—unless he
received his price.

The big, brown hand of Chuck shot across the tray with precision.
Sylvester quaked. All his insides became suddenly the consistency of
jelly. Then he remembered that the integrity of this wild battler was
known, and his fear abated. There would be no cunning sleight-of-hand
work from this customer. The hand drew back, and into the palm of it
fell an earring from which was suspended a long, narrow, beautiful
emerald.

“I sure like green,” murmured Chuck Neilan, moving his hand so that the
jewel showed a pool of light within it. “I sure like green, but I never
seen green before that would match up with this. How much?”

It was worth, perhaps, two hundred; it had been purchased for fifty;
Sylvester determined to take a snap chance. “Seven hundred,” he said,
“is what I’ll sell that emerald to you for, Chuck Neilan. I like to see
a gem like that come to a gent that will know how to appreciate it. Only
seven hundred to you, Chuck.” Again his head swam.

“Cheap . . . dirt cheap,” the madman was chanting. “Gimme that earring,
Sylvester. Got another like it?”




                                   II
                          “THE NEED FOR ACTION”


Not even those men who had gone through times of stress with Chuck
Neilan, who had proved his integrity, his fearlessness, his indomitable
faith—not even these men could call him a handsome fellow. And the next
morning it seemed to big Sylvester that the tall man who came and leaned
in his doorway was the ugliest of mortals. The nose was as crooked and
high as the beak of an eagle. The face was lean and of a bronze that
verged on redness at the high cheekbones. The jaw was square, the mouth
straight and broad, and the eye was like the eagle again, steady,
unwinking, inscrutable, so that men never could tell whether Chuck was
on the verge of laughter, oaths, or a gun play.

Certainly not a handsome man and yet a most interesting one. Few men
could pass him over with a glance. Big Sylvester, thinking of the prices
he had charged the evening before, moistened his white lips and rolled
his eyes. And still the tall man leaned there in the doorway with his
big, bony right hand draped carelessly on his hip just a little distance
above the hand-worn butt of his revolver. Sylvester stared fascinated at
that hand and at the drooping fingers that, he knew, could move with the
speed of a whiplash as it snaps.

“Good morning,” said Sylvester, and then, finding that his dry lips had
moved without an audible sound, he managed to say huskily  “’Morning,
Chuck.”

The terrible Chuck replied with not so much as a friendly nod. His
silence was, to Sylvester, hardly less awful than the explosion of a gun
and the tear of a bullet through flesh and bone.

“I done considerable buying in here last night, it seems,” said Chuck at
length, with his usual directness coming straight to the point.

“Yep,” answered the miserable Sylvester, “you seemed to hanker after
some of the things in the store.”

“I sure did,” agreed the other. “I hankered so bad that I didn’t look at
what I bought.” He paused, running his cold eye carelessly over the
burly frame of the pawnbroker.

 Who could tell —thought Sylvester— perhaps this devil of a man was
even now selecting the spot where his bullets should strike home . “You
were considerable hurried,” said the nervous Sylvester. “Didn’t stop to
do no bargaining. You just grabbed off everything at the first price and
walked away with it. Well . . . that’s good business for me, but not so
good for you.”

This candor surely would disarm the very devil himself. And even the
cheated miner smiled, although for the life of him Sylvester could not
detect an iota of real mirth in that smile.

Now Chuck Neilan lounged toward the proprietor, and there, resting his
gaunt elbow on the top of the glass case, he brought his bright, steady
eyes intolerably close to the face of Sylvester.

“I bought a pair of spurs,” he said.

Sylvester nodded.

“They busted before I got ’em home,” said Chuck Neilan.

Sylvester winced under this unexpected stroke. He had no reason to
believe that there was anything wrong with those spurs. They had stood
ten years in his window—but what was time to gold?

“I’ll fix them for you . . . for nothing,” he said.

Chuck grinned. “I bought a saddle, too.”

Perspiration poured out on the forehead of the proprietor. “Yes,” he
breathed.

“The leather was all warped, and the lining was rotten. It rubbed away
to dust almost when I touched it.”

“I didn’t know,” stammered Sylvester. “Matter of fact, I ain’t looked
close at that saddle for a good many years. You wouldn’t wait, Chuck.
You just up and walked out with things. You didn’t give me no chance to
look things over and find out. . . .”

He was interrupted by the remorseless Chuck. “I bought this here, too,”
he said, and held forth on his fingertips the emerald earring. On the
brown skin it was the rarest of rare greens. There was a slight tremor
of the fingers. Slight though it was, it filled the jewel with quivering
lights. The pawnbroker stared at the stone with wide eyes. Surely he had
not committed a great wrong in the sale of this little emerald. He had
hardly more than doubled the price, but plainly Chuck Neilan was merely
producing all the evidence and adding up the deeds that had been wrought
against him. When all was done, he would strike a swift balance with a
touch of the trigger and call the account quits.

Slowly, slowly Sylvester made his laboring eyes rise, until they rested
on the face of Neilan. To his unutterable astonishment, that face was
strangely softened, and the cold eyes for the moment were staring into
pleasant distance as one who hears music. Sylvester waited, too stunned
to make surmises.

“Where’s the other emerald? Where’s the mate to this?” asked Neilan.

“I dunno,” said Sylvester. “I dunno where it is. Only this one was
brought in.”

“That a fact?” murmured Neilan. “That a straight fact?”

The pawnbroker nodded anxiously.

“I was looking at it this morning,” muttered Neilan. “Seemed to me,
looking it over, that this here must have belonged to some young girl.
Eh? Nobody but a young girl would want to wear it, I guess. A green like
this would not be becoming to an older woman’s skin.”

“Maybe,” said the other, still anxious.

“Maybe?” echoed Chuck. “Why ain’t you sure? Don’t you remember what she
was like . . . and what her name was?”

Sylvester blinked. For the first time he began to catch his clue to what
was going on in the mind of Chuck. The latter had dreamed over this
paltry, low-grade gem until he had visualized the owner and original
wearer. He had built her into a fascinating creature of the mind, no
doubt.

“It was a man brung it in, Chuck,” he answered.

“A man?” growled Chuck, fierce with disappointment. He brooded with
sullen eyes. “How come a man brung it in?” he asked suddenly. “What
business had a man with it?”

“I dunno. He just brung it in. That’s all I know.”

“A man,” echoed Chuck, deeper and deeper in the slough of despondency.
Then his brow contracted in a murderous frown. His strong, bony fingers
closed over the fat arm of his interlocutor. “Did he say where he got
it?”

“Why,” said Sylvester, “d’you think he done murder for it? Might’ve been
his sister’s or his mother’s? Or maybe he bought it, figuring on having
it set for a stickpin.”

“Huh,” grunted Chuck Neilan, by no means satisfied with this
matter-of-fact explanation. “When did he bring it in?”

“Yesterday afternoon.”

“Late as that? Sylvester, I’ve smelled out some sort of a queer story
behind this here emerald. I dunno why. I dunno how I got at the
feeling.”

“It’s the way the morning after has hit you, son,” said Sylvester
kindly. “Strong drink does that, sometimes. Some folks see their snakes
when they’re drunk, and some sees ’em when they’re just finished being
drunk. You were sure lit up last night, Chuck.”

Chuck nodded. “What sort of a looking gent was him that brought it in?”
he asked.

“Can’t tell you that, son,” answered Sylvester. “You see, he was kind of
partial to not having his name knowed.”

“Eh?”

“He asked me not to say nothing about him.”

A flush ran up the thin cheeks of Chuck Neilan. “Sylvester,” he cried,
“don’t that prove I’m right? Don’t that prove they’s something queer
about this earring, him not wanting to have anybody know where it come
from?”

Sylvester shook his head, smiling. “No use jumpin’ to conclusions,
Chuck. It don’t mean nothing. Maybe it’s something that was give to him,
and he’s ashamed to let it be known that he’s sold it again. Maybe . . .
well, they’s a thousand ways of explaining about it, Chuck.”

But Chuck slowly and obstinately shook his head. “I got a feeling about
it,” he persisted. “Nothing rides easy in me. I’m all upset. Me having
just struck it rich don’t make no difference. Gold don’t mean nothing.
All I want is some kind of action since I took a look at that earring
this morning. And I figure, Sylvester, that I’m going to get it.”

“Go out and try,” the other advised, deeply relieved at the prospect of
getting rid of this troublesome guest. “And good luck be with you.”

But Neilan lingered. “You ain’t told me what his name is,” he insisted.

“Eh? I told you I couldn’t.”

“You ain’t told me his name,” said Chuck Neilan, his mouth drawing to a
straight line. “Listen here, you low-down, flat-headed, money-hogging
swine . . . listen to me, will you? I’d ought to salt you away with lead
so’s you’d be an example to other gents of your kind not to cheat us
simple folks in Sitting Bull. But I ain’t touching a gun, Sylvester. I’m
letting you give bail . . . and you’re going to give bail by telling me
the name of the gent that sold this to you.”

Sylvester hesitated an instant—but in that instant his eyes, meeting
the glance of the other, saw death, and they recoiled from what they
saw. “He didn’t give no name,” said Sylvester, his olive skin turning a
sickly, wan yellow. “He didn’t give no name at all, but, if you’re dead
set on it, I’ll tell you what sort of a looking gent he was. Big fellow
with a blond beard . . . sort of faded yaller. Big chest sticking out
under his chin. Wears two guns. Looks tough. And. . . .”

But the other rocked back on his heels, withdrawing from the counter for
the first time. “You don’t need to tell me no more,” he said. “That’s
enough to locate him pretty handy, if he’s stayed long enough in these
parts for any of the boys to watch which way he started. Yesterday
afternoon you say he was here?”

“Right.”

There was no chance for a further exchange of words. Tall Chuck Neilan
slid through the door, and the next moment the hoofs of his pinto
thudded in the dust.




                                  III
                         “CHALMERS IS SURPRISED”


A scant twenty minutes later the little mustang was scattering the
gravel on the south trail out of Sitting Bull, for Chuck had located and
named his man. The blond fellow of the deep chest and the yellow beard
had spent the night in the hotel, given the name of Chalmers, and
departed hardly an hour before Chuck arrived with his inquiries at the
center of the town’s social life. Chuck now rode the trail with a head
held high, and with gleaming eyes. He was in his glory, riding a trail
that no other man would have dreamed of taking, hunting a goal that no
other man would have dreamed of desiring to reach, and throwing away the
hours and the days of his youth with a wild abandon.

His man in this instance rode slowly enough. With an hour and a half of
frantic galloping, he brought his sweating mustang over a hilltop and
saw in the hollow beneath a square-shouldered man jogging steadily along
on a tall horse—a heavy rider he was, and a glint of yellow hair showed
under the back of the brim of his sombrero. So heavy of shoulders,
indeed, was the man who turned in the saddle as Chuck thundered down the
slope, hallooing, that the slowness with which his horse had traveled
was readily explained. Neilan drew back the pinto to a rocking canter
and presently drew rein on the tough little beast, directly confronting
the stranger.

“Chalmers?” inquired Chuck heartily as he drew near.

“That’s me, kid. What’s your name?”

“I’m Billy Neilan.”

“Well, Billy, what you want with me? You seem hurried by something.”

“I’ll tell you,” said Chuck. “I seen this in the pawnbroker’s place, and
I bought it. I asked him where was the mate to it, and he said that he
only had the single one. Here it is.”

He showed the emerald, and from the corner of his eye he saw the big,
blond stranger color to the brim of his hat.

“Sylvester wouldn’t tell me who sold him the emerald,” went on Chuck
artlessly, “but I looked over the gents that was in town lately, and I
couldn’t figure nobody but you would be carrying around emeralds for
sale. Most gents that float through on hossback ain’t apt to be more’n a
week’s pay ahead of the game, let alone a emerald like this one. Is it
yours?”

“No,” answered Chalmers. “You got me figured wrong, son.” He added 
“Besides, what makes you so keen to find out about it?”

“I want to find the mate to it,” said Chuck carelessly. “I’m starting in
collecting emeralds.”

“Ain’t you starting kind of cheap?” said the other.

“Cheap?” said Chuck. “Not so’s you could notice it. Would you call seven
hundred for a dinky bit of stone like this cheap?”

“Seven hundred!” cried the other. “Good Lord! Did you pay that much
after the skunk only forked over fifty to . . . ?” He stopped, his mouth
agape on the next word, realizing that he had been trapped into a
confession. Chuck Neilan was quietly grinning at him.

“All right, partner,” said Chuck. “Now tell me some more about this here
emerald, will you? Tell me where the mate to it is, and where’s the girl
that used to wear ’em?”

But Chalmers jerked his horse around and started on down the trail,
growling  “To the devil with you and your questions, both.”

Chuck spurred the pinto past his man and whirled the little beast around
on its hind legs.

“You and me ain’t through talking,” he declared, as the pinto came down
with a crash on its forefeet. “I’m still right here asking questions,
Chalmers.”

“Ask and be hanged. Why, you skinny fool, I’ll throw you off your hoss
and break your neck if you keep spoiling my view like this. Are you
plumb crazy?”

“Only half,” answered the imperturbable Chuck. “Only half, friend. I
say, are you ready to talk now?”

A light of understanding came into the eyes of Chalmers. He seemed to be
gradually remembering. And as he remembered, his color paled rapidly.

“You’re Chuck Neilan,” he said suddenly. “You’re Chuck Neilan that I’ve
heard about, I guess?”

“I’m more or less him, I guess,” admitted Chuck. “But don’t let that
make any difference if you got any designs on busting my neck, partner.”

The other scowled but made no answer. Twice his hands contracted into
fists, and twice his glance sought the revolver in the saddle holster on
Chuck’s horse, and his fingers uncurled.

“If that’s the way of it,” said Chuck, “swing out of the saddle, and
we’ll have it out on foot. I aim to hear you talk quite a pile about
this here emerald, son.”

The other blinked, then grinned in savage satisfaction as he gathered
that Chuck really meant what he said, and instantly he was out of the
saddle and on the ground, a huge man with a brutish face now lighted
with anticipation of pleasure. Chuck threw his reins and readily joined
him, but he was not yet firmly on the ground—hardly more than in the
act of landing and quite off balance—when the big man came charging in.
He came snarling and with his lips grinned back so hard that his eyes
were well nigh covered with a mass of wrinkles. He struck with a
pile-driver right. It landed high on the side of Chuck’s head and shot
him sprawling on his back.

Chalmers drove in to finish his man, his arms extended and his hands
made into claws. Plainly he intended to go for the throat like the
bulldog that he was. The horror of that distorted, bestial face and
those reaching hands froze all the muscles of Chuck for an instant. But
luckily the blow that threw him off balance had glanced and had not
stunned him. He rose to his feet now, barely escaping that blind rush,
and danced off. As Chalmers came in, he nailed the big man with a long
right, bringing him up standing, and whipped a hard left fist instantly
against his jaw.

The weight of the blows checked the rush of Chalmers, but they no more
dazed him than if they had been delivered against a head of wood. In the
very instant that he delivered the second punch, Chuck Neilan knew that
he had no chance to batter down this heavy-handed, square-jawed fighter,
and, changing his tactics at once, he dove like a football player for
the knees of his enemy. His shoulder crashed home. The big man came down
with a roar, too surprised to gain an effective hold on the slippery
body of Chuck, and the next instant the latter was on top, holding his
man securely with a half nelson and wrist lock, and jogging his face
heavily into the stones on which he lay.

A dull groan, and then a yell of surrender immediately followed.

“Will you talk now?” asked Chuck.

“Aye . . . cuss you!” growled Chalmers. And Neilan slipped away and
swung again into his saddle, with the revolver once again ready to his
hand. Chalmers picked himself up slowly and wiped away the dust from his
face. He still bore an expression of astonishment, as if he could not
quite make out what had happened to him.

“First off,” said Chuck calmly, “I want to know who owned this earring,
and who has the mate to it now.”

“Miss Harvey has it,” answered Chalmers. “Old man Harvey’s girl up in
the Miller Hills. You know the place?”

“Think I’ve heard about it. How come she give you this earring?”

“She . . . she owed me some back pay,” said the other. “This was to
square things up. And it wasn’t worth enough to square it up, at that.”

Chuck Neilan caught at a passing thought. “You lie,” he said fiercely.
“She never gave it to you. Listen here, Chalmers,” he went on, as he saw
the big man wince in a manner that was a sufficient admission that he
had lied, “I know something about this. I know enough to tell when
you’re keeping off the truth. And the truth is what I’m going to have,
Chalmers, or else I’ll blow that head of yours into a sieve. Now talk
out.”

Chalmers verified the threat by looking first at the fiercely set
features of Chuck and then at his right hand perilously near to the butt
of the gun. If he had been in his right senses, he would have known that
murder was not in the province of Chuck Neilan. But Chalmers was not in
his right senses. He was still bewildered by the manner in which victory
in the late fight had slipped out from between his two hands in the very
moment when he thought all was over. And his nerves were shaken by the
mysterious way in which he had found himself prostrate on the ground
held in an inescapable grip. To him the slender fellow on the horse
seemed capable of anything.

“She give me the emerald,” he said, “to take to Joe Purchass. You know
him?”

“I’ve heard about him, too. He’s up in the Miller Hills, I guess?”

“Yep.”

“But instead of taking it to Purchass, you . . . well, why did she want
to send it to Purchass?”

“I dunno. I got tired of trying to make head or tail out of the way that
things was going on that ranch of hers. It sure made me plumb sick to
see a fine ranch go to pieces and nothing done to stop it. They had as
pretty a herd of cows as you ever seen, a couple of years back. And now
look at ’em.”

“Rustling?” asked Chuck.

“Maybe. I dunno. Rustling? Sure it was rustling. But who done the work,
I don’t know. And who’s doing it now, I don’t know. But it’s worked as
slick as though The Wolf himself had a hand in it. I guess you know The
Wolf?”

“The Wolf?” echoed Chuck Neilan. “Good Lord. Is they anybody in the
range that don’t know The Wolf?” And his mind darted off into the haze
of part legend and part indubitable fact with which the name of The Wolf
was surrounded. “But The Wolfs gone,” he continued. “He ain’t been
working in these parts for close on to six years, I guess.”

“Then maybe it’s his ghost,” answered Chalmers, shrugging his shoulders.
“But I was working for the Henry boys eight years ago, when The Wolf
starved ’em out with his rustling gang. And the way the cows fade away
on the Harvey place sure reminds me a lot of the goings-on at the old
Henry outfit. Nobody knowed who did it. Everybody suspected everybody
else. It was sure the devil.”

“And she was sending you to Purchass, you say?” went on Chuck Neilan,
drawing the other back to the facts and away from the imaginary parts of
the narrative.

“She was.”

“You got no idea why she wanted to send this to him?”

“None in the world. Unless. . . .”

“What?”

“Purchass used to hang around a pile. Maybe. . . .”

“Maybe she’s sort of fond of him, eh?”

“Maybe.”

“I guess that lets you out, Chalmers. So long.”

There was no answer to this salutation, and Chuck cantered the pinto
slowly back up the grade, looking over his shoulder to make sure that
the disgruntled cowpuncher did not take a pot shot to even up matters.
But although Chalmers gazed long and steadily after his late companion,
he made no effort to draw his gun, and presently he climbed into the
saddle on the tall horse and vented some of his rage and shame by
spurring his mount cruelly and then driving at a sharp gallop down the
hollow and up the grade on the far side.

Chuck made sure that he was no longer in range for a rear attack, then
he drew back the hardy pinto to a walk.




                                   IV
                          “THE LURE OF COMBAT”


The horse had need for some rest after the sharp gallop out of Sitting
Bull, and Chuck himself had need for quiet hard thinking. So far as he
could make out, the matter was closed to him—as though a wall had been
built between him and the silly dreams and fancies that had taken
possession of him that morning when he first looked at the jewel. There
was, to be sure, a girl behind the emerald, just as he had suspected.
But that girl, it seemed, was sending a present to another man; and,
when a girl sends presents of this description, there could be only one
meaning. They were a token of amity, at least.

He recalled now, what he knew about Joe Purchass. His knowledge was
spotty and full of breaks. But, at least, he was certain that he had
heard of the Purchass family as one rich in land and timber and cattle.
And of Joe Purchass he knew he had heard him to be a strong man, a
daring and combative man, capable of creditably upholding the repute of
the old Purchass family, for all of that reputation was now fallen upon
his single pair of shoulders.

This data he gathered out of the mist of his memory that refused to
yield any further points. But it was sufficient for the nonce. If a girl
in difficulties on her ranch was sending jewels to such a man as Joe
Purchass, there could be only one conclusion. And he, Chuck Neilan, had
far better keep out of the trouble. He would be making a fool of himself
if he interfered.

And yet one thing drew him in spite of his reason, drew him as the
magnet draws iron. Everything in his soul of souls responded to the name
of The Wolf. The terrible and strange man was known through the whole
expanse of the mountain desert, and he was known as an invincible enemy,
a stealthy and sliding ghost of a man. What he had done was hardly to be
summed up by even the longest memory. In the narrow space of two or
three years at most he had crowded his days full of one atrocious crime
after another. From cattle rustling to murder, he had run the gamut and
even, it was said, had descended to lower levels and had committed small
crimes merely for the sake of the excitement. Everything about the man
was terrible, less than human and more than human. He was one of those
rare and devilish men who sin for the sake of sinning. Money, it was
apparent from the first, was no object to him. But the excitement of
getting money that was not his was a lure beyond resistance.

Thinking of the man, the picture of him returned to the mind of Chuck
Neilan as he had heard the demon described a hundred times. He was, of
course, always masked. Yet there were distinctive features about his
face. It was rather round, and the cheeks were pink. It was a handsome
face, despite the mask—eyes sufficient in themselves to disarm an enemy
by making him creep. But more distinctive of all, his head was
bald—prematurely bald. He was large of frame, swift of hand, deadly in
fighting of all kinds. This much was certain. He was, in short, so
easily distinguished that it seemed impossible that he could have
returned to work mischief on the ranges again without at once being
recognized and the report spreading hundreds of miles in a few hours.
This in itself seemed enough to discredit entirely the report of
Chalmers, and, yet, with a thrill running in his veins, Chuck found that
he could not dismiss the lingering belief that The Wolf in person had an
actual part in the mischief that was now going on at the Harvey ranch.

Why should his heart leap when he considered this possibility? Why
should the heart of the prize fighter, one might as well ask, leap in
his throat when he heard of the return to the ring of some famous and
undefeated champion who retired some time before because of lack of
worthy opponents? No man in the town of Sitting Bull, no man in the
environs of that village, no man for a weary journey in any direction,
would lift a hand against Chuck Neilan once his name was known. Like
Alexander, he had conquered the known world. There was no longer left
any hero who dared to do battle against him, unless he hounded
respectable, quiet citizens into a fight. And that, of course, was
entirely alien to his nature. And now, into the very heart of his
domain, so to speak, a great and famous champion had suddenly arisen
like a ghost from the grave—a man on whom he could make a three-fold
reputation.

For these reasons, then, the heart of Chuck leaped in his bosom, and he
chanted a song to the unheeding ears of the pinto as he rode along. It
was a small clue on which to ride far, but Chuck had ridden farther on
smaller clues than this. Now he determined to seek out Joe Purchass and
give him the emerald that Chalmers should have presented, but which,
like a petty thief, he had sold and then ridden away.

With his mind made up to the journey, the mind of Chuck became perfectly
calm, for the simple reason that he would not think a jot about what lay
before him until he confronted Joe Purchass himself. Blithely he rode
down into Sitting Bull, made up his pack, unsaddled the pinto, and gave
him a heavy feed, let him rest for six hours, and then struck out, in
the dusk of the day, across the mountains. It was a hundred and fifty
miles to the Miller Hills, and, once among them, he might have another
fifty to do before he reached the ranch of Joe Purchass. So he let the
pinto jog on at his own pace, which was slow but tireless, and that
night, not very long before the cold break of day, he camped far out
from Sitting Bull.

His sleep was short and troubled by dreams at that camp, for half a
dozen times he envisioned himself engaged with The Wolf. He saw clearly,
as if he had once before seen the outlaw, the smooth, bald head, as
though tonsured. He saw the smile for which The Wolf was famous. In the
midst of murder itself, that faint smile, men said, was never quite
extinguished.

He wakened before the day was well advanced and struck out at once. In
the first stage he had covered fifty miles. By afternoon of the next day
he was among the Miller Hills. And that evening he learned at a ranch
house the location of the Purchass place. The following morning he rode
into sight of it.

It needed only a glance to determine that this was a rich estate. The
buildings stood on a slightly swelling rise of ground, though the entire
space which they occupied was itself in the center of a great hollow
with the hills ranged about the edges of the cup in protective rows. The
house was far larger than common. The whitewashed outbuildings, barns,
and sheds were innumerable, shambling off in all directions from the
dwelling house, except to the east. On this side the prospect was kept
clear of business. The slope of ground was loosely planted with trees,
and the eye of Chuck rested on stretches of watered lawn here and there
among the trees and even colorful beds of flowers, with the colors
blurred and smudged by the distance and the morning mist.

If this were the scale on which Joe Purchass lived and acted, well for
Chuck, indeed, if he kept out of the affairs of the rich man. To be
sure, he had wealth of his own coming out of the mine, great wealth it
might be, but never comparable to such an established power as this.
Humility entered the soul of the cowpuncher, but it did not stay there
long. He cast humility over his shoulder like a worn-out coat, and with
a shrill whistle he started the pinto down the last slope of his long
trail.

From the distance, when he could look on the ranch headquarters spread
out beneath him like a map, it had been impressive enough, but, when he
dropped into the lower level and approached the knoll on which the
buildings stood, his awe was vastly increased, and he only kept himself
whistling carelessly by a great effort of the will.

The trees were far taller than they had seemed. The grass plots expanded
into wide-sweeping lawns—the sure proof that the householder was from
the East—and the colorful spots of flowers expanded in turn into
little, formal gardens. When he came out in front of the building, Chuck
approached it with a constant stiffening of the back. He moved by
instinct toward the side entrance, dismounted, threw the reins of his
horse, and then walked up to the door and knocked.




                                   V
                         “INSTINCTIVE DISTRUST”


The first glance at the stately figure of the proprietor made Chuck
wonder how persons could possibly call such a man Joe. That he was not
known everywhere as Joseph and perhaps with an initial after the full
first name was a great tribute to the democracy of the West. He was in
every way a big man, a full six feet and two inches in height, with
ample proportions of breadth and thickness to match. His head was
covered with a close-curling crop of black-brown hair, that also grew in
sideboards and whiskers, almost covering his face and descending to a
short, pointed beard—a tonsorial arrangement that made his head seem
extremely long. The manner of the rich man was as dignified as his
appearance. His voice was big in volume but carefully held down to a
pleasant speaking note; training had enabled him to make it perfectly
smooth and equable. Only when he laughed or exclaimed, the voice burst
out and roared in the astonished ears of the listeners. For the rest,
his clothes were ordinary by comparison.

He was not garbed poorly, after the fashion of many Westerners who make
it a point that they may surprise strangers by the contrast between
their bank accounts and the sums borne about on their backs. Joe
Purchass was dressed very plainly, nevertheless, and he had in addition
a habit of continually attempting to bring his manner to a more plain
and matter-of-fact basis. One felt that this effort was not entirely
true to his inner nature, and it merely made those about him ill at
ease. It was a forcible reminder that Joe Purchass had spent all of his
more youthful years in the East and had come West only a scant year
before, to assume the management of the entire family property that had
at length come into his hands. He took on this matter-of-fact manner as
he greeted the rather embarrassed Chuck Neilan.

“I’ve heard about you, Mister Neilan,” he said. “And I’m glad to meet
you now. I’ve heard about you as a very honest man and a very dangerous
enemy. I hope that you haven’t come up here bringing trouble with you?”

He chuckled a little as he spoke, and Chuck felt a bristling of dislike
go up his backbone. There was no reason for such an impulse. It was
purely blind dislike. But the instinctive things we do and feel are
doubtless far more powerful than our reasoned actions. On the spot, he
distrusted instantly and disliked Joe Purchass. For that reason he
smiled in his most amiable fashion.

“I dunno,” said Chuck. “I guess this ain’t trouble. Leastwise, it don’t
look like no trouble that I ever seen. I think this is coming to you?”
As he spoke, he slipped the emerald earring from his vest pocket and
extended it in the open palm of his hand to Purchass.

The effect upon Joe Purchass was startling. First he started a pace
back. Then he snatched the jewel from the hand of Chuck, and he peered
at it as though in the changing green lights of the jewel he expected to
read a message. Next, as though recalling himself, he straightened, and,
while he placed the emerald in his wallet, slipping it, Chuck noticed,
into a little pocket by itself, he examined Chuck with keen eyes.

“You’re a new man at the Harvey place?” he asked. “How are things over
there? And what’s happening? Are they still talking about rustling and
such nonsense?”

“I dunno,” answered Chuck. “I’m not from the Harvey place. I’m from
Sitting Bull.”

And then, very quickly and simply, omitting as many of the unusual
details of the story as possible, he told what had happened, and why it
was that he had taken the long ride through the mountains to the
Purchass Ranch. Joe Purchass listened with a growing astonishment, and,
in conclusion, he stretched out his hand and caught that of Chuck in an
overwhelming grip. Plainly the man did not realize the extent of his own
prodigious strength. Chuck gritted his teeth and prayed that no bones
were broken in his hand. He managed to maintain a half smile of
carelessness.

“You’ve done a mighty fine thing,” said Joe Purchass. “All the finer
because you did it on the spur of the moment. You don’t know the
Harveys. You don’t know Kate Harvey, at least, and she’s the important
one. Certainly, you’ve never seen me before. Altogether, Mister Neilan,
you’ve done a thing that I won’t forget in a hurry. As a matter of fact,
I want to show you my gratitude in a more substantial way immediately. I
know you hard-riding, hard-drinking fellows. Money rolls away from you
about as fast as it rolls to you. Now, Neilan, just step into the
library with me and let me give you a check that. . . .”

Chuck raised his hand with no little natural dignity of his own.

“Purchass,” he said, “a few days ago I hit it rich in the mines. No
credit to me. Just luck. But the point is that I hit it rich, and I’ll
probably get more cash out of that mine than I can ever spend on myself.
Well, sir, it was right after that I decided to ride up here and give
you the emerald. Money ain’t what I’m after.”

Joe Purchass frowned. Strange to say, this profession of indifference to
money did not seem to please him at all. “At least,” he said, with a
touch of coldness in both manner and voice, “you’ll let me repay you the
price of the emerald.”

Chuck considered, and then shook his head.

“You don’t owe me money,” he said. “If anybody owes it to me, it’s the
girl.”

“She couldn’t pay you,” answered Purchass. “She couldn’t pay you, my
quixotic friend. Her ranch is almost ready to fall to pieces under the
load of mortgages her idiot of a father piled on it. No matter how
cheaply you bought the emerald, it would be a great hardship for her to
attempt to redeem the earring.”

“I’m not going to ask her to,” said Chuck with equal firmness, and
frowning a little in his turn.

Joe Purchass blinked, for plainly he could not understand. “Just what
are you after?” he asked bluntly, and his smooth voice roughened and
increased marvelously in volume. “Just what are you after, my friend?”

“Action,” said Chuck curtly. “I’m looking for excitement, not money. And
action is what I figure on getting.”

“I don’t quite follow you,” replied Purchass.

“No? Well, Chalmers, the hound, told me he figured that The Wolf had
something to do with this business at the Harvey ranch.”

“Good Lord! The Wolf!” breathed Purchass.

“Yep. That’s what Chalmers said, and he talked as though he meant it.
Said there was the same smooth sort of work.”

Purchass seemed to have recovered from the first shock. He broke
suddenly into ringing laughter, so loud that Chuck was pressed back a
step or two by the noise.

“The Wolf?” he repeated, chuckling when he could speak. “That’s
nonsense, Neilan. Chalmers was drunk or dreaming. Rustling, in my
estimation, has little to do with the ruin of the Harvey ranch. The
insane extravagances of old Harvey, and the fact that the girl is trying
to do a man’s work and run the big place by herself now . . . those are
the things which, combined, have run down the place and loaded it with
debts where it used to be a paying proposition. Of course, there has
been some rustling. Up in those wild hills there are twenty good hiding
places in every square mile, and rustlers could work pretty safely up
there. No wonder if a few of them have collected and run off some cows
now and then. No wonder at all. But, sir, that is not what has ruined
Harvey, because he has ruined himself.”

“Hmm,” growled Chuck, forced to admit the self-evident truth of all
this. “Just the same. . . .”

“My dear fellow,” the rich man broke in, laughing again, “Chalmers was
drunk. Don’t you know that the day of cattle rustling is past? Too many
already have been hung for that work.”

“It was only six years ago,” broke in Chuck, “that The Wolf was working
around these parts.”

“The devil!” cried the rancher. “Are you going to hark back to that myth
of a man all the time? By heaven, I don’t believe the villain ever
existed. Be reasonable, Mister Neilan. Consider, also, that no one would
be capable of robbing a girl like Kate Harvey.”

“No one but The Wolf,” vociferated Chuck. “Every word you say makes me
surer and surer that devil of a man is really at work up yonder in the
hills around the Harvey ranch.”

Joe Purchass grew very red with anger, but immediately he controlled
himself and stepped back. “Very well, sir,” he said, “if you think that,
the best thing for you to do is to go out and find your man . . . and
good luck go with you. But if what they say about The Wolf is half true,
you’ll have a considerable task on your hands.”

The sneer with which this was said made Chuck Neilan even more red than
the rancher had been the moment before.

“Matter of fact,” he admitted, “I haven’t set up to be a better man than
The Wolf. I know he’s a devil. I’ve heard enough about his murderings
and how straight he could shoot and how fast he was at getting a gun out
of the leather. I know all that, and that’s why I wanted to talk to you.
I thought that maybe we could go hunting together and that way. . . .”

“Hunting a ghost? Hunting a man who if he ever existed . . . which I
doubt . . . has certainly been dead these six years?”

“Well,” muttered Chuck, a little abashed by the conviction of the other,
“I see that you’re going to keep out of it, but that doesn’t mean that
I’m through. I’m going to stick on this trail till it comes to some sort
of an end. So long, Mister Purchass!”

The rancher grumbled an answer and turned away, but almost immediately
his good nature returned, and he ran after and overtook Chuck before the
latter could leave the house.

“Look here,” he cried, laying that tremendously heavy hand on the
shoulder of Chuck and spinning him around very much as though he were a
top, “you can’t leave like this. You’ve done me a fine turn, Neilan, and
I mean that you shall profit by it. Stay here and teach me some way I
can serve you. You won’t take money. I apologize for offering it to you.
At least, stay on and spend the night after your long ride. I’m starting
off at once, but I’ll see that you’re taken care of . . . and there’s
some real old stuff here, my boy . . . not moonshine, but the real
article.”

The last bit of information struck Chuck at his weakest point. For an
instant he wavered. Then he shook his head.

“I’ll stick by this trail. It’s bad luck to leave off a trail before
you’ve seen both ends of it. Good bye, Mister Purchass.”

His last impression of the big man was that he had started to speak in
protest but almost immediately changed his mind and, with a shrug of his
massive shoulders, turned his back on his departing guest and went into
the next room.

Outside, Chuck swung into the saddle on the pinto and rode down to the
nearest barn. He found a spindling youngster stuffing straw into sacks.

“What’s the way to the Harvey Ranch, son?” asked Chuck.

The youth turned as though struck, and blinked at Chuck. “You’re
another, eh?” he grunted. “You’re another for the Harvey Ranch?”

“Sure.”

“Funny they didn’t tell you how to get there, then. But hit north,
straight north, and you’ll sure come to it or folks that can tell you
 pronto  where it is. What’s your job going to be up yonder?”

“To keep a quiet tongue in my head and not talk like King Solomon before
I’m old enough to wear long pants,” said Chuck reprovingly.

And he swung the pinto to the left and struck north.




                                   VI
                          “AT THE HARVEY RANCH”


Sometimes our brains work strangely, refusing to take heed of what our
eyes see and our ears hear, until a considerable time has passed. So it
was with Chuck Neilan on this day. He had put many a mile behind him by
means of the industrious hoof of the pinto before his brain harked back
to what the stable boy at the Purchass Ranch had said to him. When he
thought about it the second time, it seemed to Chuck to be of more than
passing interest. How was it that the boy knew so much, or guessed so
much, and seemed to think with such mingled scorn and disgust about the
Harvey Ranch? Once, indeed, he grew so excited at the prospect that he
stopped the pinto in the middle of the trail and was on the verge of
turning back, when he realized after an instant of reflection that if he
returned and opened the same subject again, the boy’s suspicions would
be aroused, and he would become silent. So, growling at himself for a
fool because he had not pumped the boy for information when the occasion
was before him, he sent the pinto on again.

It was only fifteen miles as a bird flies, but as the trail wound it was
nearer to thirty, uphill and down. The sun was setting when he came to
the Harvey Ranch. No such imposing group of buildings as the Purchass
place lay before him now. On a hillside, bald of trees, stood the
unpainted buildings of headquarters for the Harvey Ranch. The woods
which rolled green through the hollow on either side made the bareness
of that slope stand out in striking contrast, and it seemed to Chuck
that even from the distance he could feel the atmosphere of poverty
which beset the place. The journey down the last slope occupied enough
time to bridge the gap between the colorful heart of the sunset to the
early portion of the dusk. All the world was gray when he rapped at the
front door of the house.

The knock echoed through the interior, and then a tapping sound
approached the door, a tapping sound of a cane accompanied by a
shuffling noise of footfalls. Presently the door opened, and a cripple
looked out at Chuck.

He was a man apparently not more than sixty at the most, but in certain
features he appeared much older. His thin, long hair, for instance, was
the purest white and so scant that it fell down beside his face,
stirring in the air like a morning mist. His brows were gathered in a
frown that was rather whimsical than wrathful or pettish. In his right
hand was the knob-head of a thick cane that, by infinite usage and much
brushing against things in the house, was polished throughout its
length. He rested much of his weight upon this staff while he peered out
rather anxiously at Chuck.

“Don’t appear to recollect you, son,” he said, “but step right in and
make yourself to home. You’re a mite late for supper, but we’ll get
something together for you. Step right in.”

Chuck accepted the invitation and then followed the invalid down the
hall into the interior of the dwelling. As he studied the painful
laboring of that bent back, it occurred to him that he had come here for
no purpose that could be easily explained to anyone. Men did not ride
two hundred miles for the sake of getting into a fight, particularly
when the fight was to be with a personage who probably was
non-existent—The Wolf. His embarrassment reached a climax when his
guide kicked open a door and ushered Chuck into the kitchen. It was
littered with the dirty pans and dishes of the supper, and at the sink,
making a great clattering at her work, was a young girl who turned to
face them.

By something in her eyes as she greeted the old man, Chuck knew that
this was Kate, the daughter of Harvey, who was attempting to run the
ranch, and who was making such a failure of it. No wonder, if in
addition to her managerial capacity, she had to act as cook and
dishwasher, which seemed to be also in her sphere of service.

She showed not the slightest embarrassment, however, in meeting the
stranger.

“Here’s a gent come in to spend the night with us. Name is . . . he told
me while we were coming down the hall. I didn’t catch it.”

“Bill Neilan is my name,” said the cowpuncher.

“And this is my daughter, Kate. Can you fix him up a snack, honey?”

She nodded, indicated a chair where he might sit at the table, whisked
from in front of him a litter of dishes, and turned to the stove—all
while her father was getting through the door and out of the room. Chuck
regarded her with side glances. He had had his affairs of the heart
before, but never had he found a girl who fitted into his mind with the
exactness of Kate Harvey. In the space of ten seconds he was in the
midst of a pleasant dream that he spun out. He was wakened by the glance
of the girl falling on him as decisively as the hand of a man might have
fallen upon his shoulder.

“You can wash over there. You’ll find the basin hanging on a nail . . .
that granite basin upside down. There’s some soap in the soap rack to
your left. If you want hot water, there’s some in this kettle. Help
yourself!”

Chuck followed these explicit and curt directions. He was extremely
downhearted by this time. Would to heaven, he thought, that he could pay
for his meal in cash. But he could not offer to pay for food in this
house. And he was heaping extra work on her at the end of a day during
which who could tell what household and range-riding duties she had
performed. He was frowning over this thought, as he dried his hands on
the circular runner that served as towel, when the girl spoke.

“I’ve been thinking about your name. Are you ever called Chuck Neilan?”

He nodded, and then noted with indescribable mortification that her face
hardened and her lip curled a little. No doubt she had heard some of the
worst tales that circulated through the mountains, with him for the main
hero. The exploits of a fighter are sadly altered in the telling, and,
though the distance to Sitting Bull was not so very great, it was enough
to twist things into a queer mess. Chuck wondered what she could have
heard as he studied her disdainful face—a labor he continued through
side glances as she turned some cold, fried potatoes in thick bacon
gravy into the frying pan to be warmed.

She must have heard something very bad, indeed, to judge by her
coldness. On the whole, there was a great deal that was disagreeable
about her. She was by no means the clinging-vine type. Her voice was as
level as the voice of a man. And so were her eyes. And though her
profile was turned with haunting delicacy about nose and mouth, there
was an accompanying pride as stern and cold as the pride of a man. The
hand that, a few moments later, deftly slipped the plates and saucers
and cups before him, and the steaming food and coffee with them—that
hand was amazingly slight. But the voice with which she asked if he
wanted anything else was utterly without emotion. Chuck made a desperate
attempt to break the ice and start up conversation.

“When you heard my name,” he said, “I guess it wasn’t with anything in
my favor.”

“I’ve almost forgotten the story.”

She answered with a half glance over her shoulder, not at him but partly
toward him, as though he were not worth a full turn of the head. The
dishes rattled again, and the steam from the dishwater rose. Chuck
Neilan fortified himself with a gulp of hot coffee.

“Well,” he said at length, “I’m sorry.”

“Sorry that I’ve forgotten the story?”

“Sorry that the story you heard was so darned bad.”

“I haven’t said it was,” answered the girl, as cold as ever.

“You’ve looked more’n words could say,” responded Chuck. “A pile more.”

At this, she whirled squarely toward him, parted her lips to speak, and
then, at sight of his anxious face, changed her mind and turned back
again.

“You see,” went on Chuck Neilan, “it takes about two tellings of the
same story to get it all twisted. I’m wondering how many ways the facts
that got to you was twisted.”

She made no pretense of turning now. “You’ve never done anything really
bad, I guess,” she said, with an intonation that contradicted the words.

“Sure I have,” answered Chuck. “Plumb bad, lady. But I’ve never done
nothing mean . . . and by the way you look I figure that you must have
heard some pretty mean talk about me.”

“What,” she asked, “is the exact difference between badness and
meanness?”

Chuck poised his fork meditatively. “Badness,” he said, “is beating up a
man-sized man . . . meanness is beating up a hoss that can’t fight
back.”

At this, she turned again and remained turned, heedless of the water,
yellowed with the stain of soap, that trickled from the dishcloth in a
steady stream to the floor. There was a twinkle of appreciation in her
eyes. She seemed to be seeing him for the first time. And he, certainly,
was seeing Kate Harvey for the first time.

“You feel a bit better about me?” he asked.

At this, she laughed frankly, tossed the dish rag into the wash pan with
a great sloshing of the water, and came opposite him at the table. She
dropped her hands, red and shining from the suds, on the top of the
unpainted kitchen chair, facing him.

“What are you doing up here, Chuck?” she asked.

He was unprepared for this sudden lowering of the bars. He seemed to be
admitted to a footing of semi-intimacy by the very intonation of that
voice. It filtered down into his heart of hearts, a thrilling experience
to Chuck. But he must not think that he had succeeded too far.

“I don’t know exactly why I’ve come,” he said.

To his surprise she nodded, not at all put out by this shuffling away of
reasons and causes.

“Near as I can make out,” she said, “that’s why most of you boys start
out. You get tired of working in one place . . . then you light out and
ride till a river stops you.”

“A river don’t,” said Chuck, grinning. “My hoss swims like a fish.”

She nodded again. Plainly she liked him much better than ever before.
But what should he say to her? It occurred to Chuck that she was far
from a romantic type of girl. And this being the case, would it not be
wise to refrain from telling her the true story of how he came to be at
that moment in her kitchen?

“I’ll tell you why I’m here,” he ventured at length. “I’ve heard that
they’s some rustling going on up here.”

She nodded. “You’ve heard right, Chuck Neilan.”

“And I’ve heard that The Wolf was doing the work.”

She started. “The Wolf! That devil?”

She slipped back from him until her shoulders rested against the wall of
the room, and there she leaned, almost out of breath, and staring at
Chuck as though he were literally the man whom he had named.

“The Wolf? What put that name into your head?”

Chuck had risen from his chair, but now she advanced again with an
effort at laughter.

“Don’t mind me,” she explained. “Once . . . oh, it must have been six
years ago . . . The Wolf came here . . . The Wolf himself. He sneaked
into the house. He was after a safe Dad kept in the attic. But when he
got into my room, he made a noise, and it wakened me. I saw him . . .
bald head . . . round face . . . mask . . . and all, and I screamed and
fainted. Why he didn’t murder me for disturbing him and rousing the
house, I never could tell. At any rate, he was gone when I woke up. My
father was beside me. I told him what I had seen, and he went out and
got the boys out of the bunkhouse. They searched all around the ranch
house, but they found no sign, and at length they decided that I had
simply had a bad dream. But it wasn’t a dream. I still can see him . . .
that giant . . . standing there with the moonlight pouring around him
and shining on his bald head. Oh!”

She pressed both hands over her face, but, when she dropped her hands,
her expression was almost as calm as ever. She was about to speak again
when a knocking came at the side door, and she went to open it.




                                  VII
                           “CHUCK RIDES ALONE”


A messenger was there with a sweating horse behind him. He jerked up the
brim of his hat when he saw her and presented a note.

“From Joe Purchass,” he said. “How are ye, Miss Harvey?”

“Fine. Come in, Charlie.”

“Can’t do it. Got strict orders. Minute I get this into your hands, I’m
to turn around and come back to Purchass  pronto . Can’t even stop for a
drink of water or”—here he craned his neck and sniffed
enviously—“coffee. So long and good luck, Miss Harvey.”

He was into the saddle in a flash, and the broncho wheeled in true
cow-horse style and darted out of view. The girl ripped open the
envelope anxiously. She read with a frown at first and then with an
exclamation of wonder. She tossed the letter aside and faced Chuck with
heightened color.

“I wonder that you’re still sitting there,” she cried, “after the way
I’ve treated you . . . and after what you’ve done for me. I’ve a letter
from Joe Purchass there. He tells me everything . . . in short . . .
that you’ve done. Well . . . what you’ve done is fine . . . mighty
fine.”

She went straight to him and shook his hand with almost the strength of
a man. And all the time her eyes were shining with such a light that
Chuck found it hard to meet them squarely. All in a moment, then, she
released his hand, made him sit down again, and took the opposite chair.

“I’ve been ready to think that everybody except Joe Purchass is a crook.
But now I see I was wrong . . . and, oh, I’m glad of it. But he barely
hinted at what you’ve done. I want you to tell me everything . . .
everything.”

Chuck shook his head. “Can’t do it,” he said. “I just sort of followed
my nose, and here I am. You see?”

The girl laughed, delighted again.

“Sometimes I think that men and women are a good deal alike, after all.
But just when I’m almost convinced of it, along comes someone like you,
Chuck Neilan, and shows me that I’m a thousand times wrong. Well, don’t
tell me, then, if you don’t want to . . . but let’s go back to what you
said about The . . . The Wolf.” She hesitated before she could enunciate
that nightmare name. “Did you mean what you said about him?”

“It’s what I got out of Chalmers,” confessed Chuck. “And he . . . well,
when Chalmers was talking, he wasn’t in no mood to tell no more truth
than he could help. Maybe he just threw in that about The Wolf by guess
work. He said that he simply thought it might be The Wolf, because The
Wolf worked so plumb smooth, and this gent that’s bothering you ain’t
any bungler himself.”

“Was that the only reason?” said the girl, sighing with relief.

“It was enough to start me going,” said Chuck Neilan gravely. “It was
enough reason to seem sound to me. And here I am ready for work, Miss
Harvey, if you’ll put me to work.”

“If I’ll put you to work? Oh, if I’d only had one man like you before.
But none of the cowards would stay. They ran away, as Chalmers did, when
they found there was danger up here. Why, I’ve almost rounded up two or
three of the rustlers myself, Chuck, and each time they’ve slipped away
from me, simply because I haven’t had helpers with me and . . . I do a
good many rough things, you know, but I can’t shoot to kill.”

“And were they just as polite as you?”

“They were.” She nodded, very grave and puzzled. “I’ve often wondered at
it. While I rode after them, shooting into the air, not once did they
turn and try a pot shot at me . . . and yet, once I was almost on top of
a rascal on a gray horse. . . .” She stopped and shook her head. “But
there’s no cause for worry after this. No cause at all. Do you know
what’s going to happen?”

“You’re going to let me have a try at ’em,” suggested Chuck, his lips
drawing back thin on his teeth, so that he looked for the moment the
picture of a savage terrier that sees the promise of a fight just ahead.

“I know you’d give them trouble enough,” the girl said, her eyes shining
out at him again in that singular way they had, “but a great fighter and
a strong man with a lot of good fighters and strong men behind him is
coming down to the ranch. And they’ll clean out the rustlers. Oh,
they’ll find them and run them down and jail them. I . . . I. . . . The
cowards! The low-down cowards! They’ve ruined the ranch . . . they’ve
broken father’s heart . . . they’ve nearly killed me with worry . . .
and now they’ll be paid back.”

Her voice broke with her emotion. Chuck, excited and sympathetic, leaned
toward her.

“Who’s coming to take over the job, then?”

“Guess, guess.”

“I don’t know the folks around these parts.”

“It’s Joe Purchass that’s coming,” cried the girl. “Think of how. . . .”

She paused. The face of Chuck Neilan was dark as a thundercloud.

“Purchass?” was all he said. “Him?”

“Why, who on earth could be better for the work than big Joe and all his
men? And Joe alone is a host. He’s like lightning with a gun, and he
doesn’t fear a hundred.” Her face lighted as she described her warrior.

“Well,” said Chuck Neilan dryly, “I guess I’d ought to wish you
happiness, you having Purchass coming along. And it’s sure easy to see
that there ain’t going to be no call for me to do any work rounding up
rustlers on your ranch. That being the case, and me being through the
supper, I guess I’ll slope. S’long, Miss Harvey.”

“Good bye,” said the girl stiffly.

He stalked to the door. Before he quite reached it, there was a rush of
footfalls behind him, and then the girl darted in before him and set her
shoulders against the door. Her eyes glimmered up at him angrily.

“Aren’t you ashamed, Chuck Neilan?” she cried. “Aren’t you ashamed?”

He fell back. His dignity broke into small bits and tumbled from his
shoulders. He looked about him. There was no refuge from those
remorseless eyes.

“Aren’t you ashamed?” she repeated. “D’you mean to say you’d run off and
sulk, simply because another man is coming in to fight for me?”

“He has the right . . . ,” began Chuck, but he was interrupted by her
burst of merry laughter. “Well,” he said, “I guess I’ve been a fool,
right enough. I’ll stay on, if you think I’ll be any good here.”

“Of course, you’ll stay!” cried the girl, still laughing. “Go back to
that table and sit down. And if you want to work, why, you can start in
tonight or tomorrow morning. Matter of fact, those fiends probably will
get word that Joe Purchass is coming, and they may try to make a big
scoop just before he arrives. You understand?”

“Try to clean you out of house and home before the fighter comes, eh?”

“Ah, they’re cruel enough to try anything. Do you know, I think that
they’ve purposely stolen the cattle by small degrees instead of driving
off every living thing on my range . . . and simply because they wanted
to torment my father first and then me.” Tears sprang from her eyes as
she thought of it.

“Don’t seem like there could be skunks like that west of the Rockies,”
muttered Chuck. “But, suppose you sit right down yonder and tell me
where they hang out mostly. I might do a bit of herd riding tonight
myself.”

She shook her head. “You couldn’t do anything by yourself.”

“Gimme a try at ’em.”

“But they’d outnumber you. . . .”

“Nothing like luck,” said Chuck, “in a pinch. And I’m sure lucky, Miss
Harvey.”

“I believe it. Well, have it your own way, because if I don’t give you
permission, you’ll go, anyway.”

“Right,” said Chuck.

The council of war began at once. On the top of the kitchen table,
scrubbed to whiteness and softness, she drew with pencil a rude sketch
of the ranch and pointed out to him the places of strategic importance,
so far as the rustlers were concerned. There were a thousand such
places, it seemed to Chuck, as she enumerated hill and dale and wood and
meadow and twisting creekbeds, where hunted men could scurry through the
highlands by shortcuts. After a time his powers of listening were
blurred. Already, in thought, he was out in the open under the stars and
under the moon hunting for action. And though he knew that the girl was
planning ways and means, he could not to save himself follow her
schemes. At length she ended.

“You have my idea?” she said.

“Exactly,” Chuck said with a smile, and fortunately she believed him.

There was one trouble. The poor pinto was much too tired to be used for
this night shift. But the trouble was remedied readily enough. Chuck
went with the girl out to the corrals, and there he selected, following
her advice, a fine-appearing brown mare, on whose back he cinched his
own saddle. Kate Harvey followed him to the gate of the corral, pleading
to the last that he give up this breakneck scheme, but he merely shook
his head, and in a moment he was waving back to her and cantering
lightly across the fields.

In the gathering darkness, for it was not yet quite full night, she
dwindled and finally went out behind him, and then Chuck wakened to the
necessities of the work that lay before him. It was a sobering thought.
While he was in the company of the girl, it had seemed a slight enough
thing to attack and route a whole army of desperadoes. Now he realized
that he was playing a dangerous game in a country strange to him and, no
doubt, against great odds, so far as numbers went. He jogged the first
mile across the lowland at an easy pace. As he mounted to the first
ridge, the moon pushed a yellow edge above the top of an eastern hill
and showed him the district in which he must do the hunting of that
night.




                                  VIII
                          “THE MAN ON THE GRAY”


It was an extent of hills as deeply chopped and hollowed out as the face
of the ocean on a windy day. There were no commanding elevations,
nothing approaching to a mountain, but, as far as his eye commanded, he
saw ridge on ridge of hills, with sharp-sided dales in between. One
could hardly see a distance of a hundred yards in any direction, and, to
confuse one further, there was a dense sprinkling of trees here and
there. Even if he sighted a stranger in this brightening moon shine, it
might be difficult, or well nigh impossible, for him to run down the
man. Here and there he saw cattle browsing, indistinct figures moving
toward the trees in the hollow just before him. At least that proved the
rustlers had made no move for that night.

Chuck Neilan glanced over the ground ahead. He wanted a proof of the
speed of his mount, and here was going good enough for a test. The first
touch of the spur sent the brown away like a whirlwind. Down the gully
they darted and came in a single instant, it seemed to the delighted
Chuck, up to the top of the opposite ridge. Yes, the brown had plenty of
speed, and it would be a well-mounted rover, indeed, who should escape
him, once sighted, so long as sight could be kept.

With this comforting thought, and with the moon steadily rising so that
the angle of the shadows cast by hill and tree grew less and less, Chuck
wandered on through his domain, keeping a sharp lookout for mounted men.
Not, indeed, that he really expected to find a marauder at work or even
in passing. But the narrative of the girl had enraged him to the point
where he was hungry for action, and now he was determined to shoot first
and ask his questions afterward.

He never departed from a trot or a walk, saving the strength and speed
of the brown. There was one fault in his mount that early made him shake
his head and swear under his breath. His horse was by no means
sure-footed, and several times the leggy mare stumbled on roots or
stones. Her speed, however, would make up for any other deficiency.

In the meantime, the white moon shine cut with increasing clearness
through the trees among which he was riding, and it was by virtue of
that clear light that he saw his man at last—a glimmer in the distance
among the trees. It might be the sway of a leafy bough. It might be the
passing of a cow. But in order to investigate even a shadow of a
possibility, Chuck turned his mare and drove her at a round gallop
straight in the direction of the thing that had caught his attention. He
had not covered a hundred yards when he heard a stifled exclamation of a
man’s voice, and in another instant a gray horse burst from the edge of
a covert and darted away across a clearing, with the rider lying flat
along its back.

Honest men did not ride in such a fashion at the first sight of a
stranger. Chuck Neilan, as he gathered the mare under him with a touch
of the spurs, whipped out his revolver and tried a snap shot at the
disappearing figure. A shout of defiance answered him, and he knew that
he had missed. He had no chance for further thinking. The tall brown was
shooting beneath the trees, across the clearing, and then into more
trees. Up a hillside beyond the brown whirled him and, then, as they
shot out of the veiling trees, he caught a second fleeting glimpse of
the stranger, this time framed vividly against the sky above him. It was
only the glance of an instant, with the discovery pointed by the
explosion of a revolver in the hand of the stranger.

The bullet missed, but it hummed terrifyingly near to Chuck’s head and
proved that his antagonist must be quite or nearly as good a marksman as
himself. If so, it spiced the pleasure of the night ride for Chuck
Neilan. Then he plunged over the ridge of that hill and bolted down into
a fairly wide and shallow dale. And with a shout of delight Chuck saw
that the speed of his mount was bringing him up with his quarry, hand
over hand. Twice the man on the gray whirled in the saddle and fired;
twice he missed by a narrow margin, while the brown decreased the
interval with its prodigious leaps. Then, as he neared his man, Chuck
poised his gun for his own second shot. But he could not shoot down a
man at pointblank range with his back turned. He called a warning, his
man turned in the saddle with a yell of alarm—and at that moment the
brown floundered, pitched to its knees, and sent Chuck hurtling through
the air.

He landed with stunning force on his back, but, luckily enough, the
force of a fall that might well have broken his neck landed chiefly on
that padding of thick muscles just above the shoulder blades. As it was,
he was badly shaken, and with his wits barely returned to him, he
dragged himself slowly to his knees. His mind was quickly cleared now.
There were two explosions of a revolver in rapid succession, and with
the second a pain shot across his forehead as though a razor edge, white
hot, had seared him there. Immediately there was a warm flow down his
face. That sting of a bullet saved him. He looked up to see the
marauder, cursing his bad luck, steadying his hand for a finishing shot
after his two misses.

Before the gun exploded, Chuck Neilan whipped his own weapon out of the
holster and fired from the hip. It was more luck, he knew, than virtue,
that enabled him to strike his target with that chance shot. The man on
the gray horse pitched forward, then rolled to one side, and fell on the
ground with an audible thump. The gray horse danced away a few paces,
but lingered, poor beast, to whinny a soft inquiry as to the fate of its
master.

But Chuck had no time to pity the horse. He was filled with a wild anger
at the rider whom he could have shot through the back a dozen times
during the pursuit, and who, in return for this chivalrous treatment,
had attempted to shoot him down like a dog when he was helpless from his
fall. In an instant he was at the prostrate victim, jerked him over on
his back, and shoved the muzzle of his Colt into the hollow of the
rascal’s throat.

All this he accomplished before his man stirred, groaned, and opened his
eyes. Now Chuck saw what had happened. The bullet had been a chance hit,
indeed. It had chipped a short groove in the very apex of the man’s
skull. From this wound a slight trickle was running, but it would be
stopped in a moment or two by coagulation. In truth, it was the veriest
scratch of a hit, but the force of the blow had stunned the rider. In
fact, he hardly saw his victim open his eyes before the mind of the
latter cleared from his swoon, and he strove to tug a knife at his belt
out of its sheath.

A harsh command from Chuck, and the chill and convincing pressure of the
muzzle against his throat brought him to his senses in time. As Chuck
rose, his captive obediently rolled upon his face, cursing savagely and
steadily while Chuck tied his hands. Leaving him secure, Chuck now
caught the horses, mounted his victim on the gray, tied his feet under
his mount, fastened the bridle of the gray to the horn of his own
saddle, swung up on the brown, and was ready to return triumphant. But
he paused first to make some examination of his man.

Never in his life had he seen so low a specimen of humanity. Low brows
beetled over little black eyes that were now snapping with malignity.
His head was thrust forward on a chunky neck at a sharp angle from the
erect. His face was almost a perfect square, and in profile the heavy
brows projected well nigh as much as the nose itself. Chuck Neilan
regarded the brute details of this countenance with a shiver. Well for
him that he had not fallen into the power of the man. He would have been
murdered remorselessly. Just as this thought came to him, he remembered
what the girl had said about her pursuit of a man on a gray horse, and
how he had refrained from shooting back at her. This was strange. It was
more than strange. It was nearly a miracle.

“Friend,” said Chuck, “are you the gent that Miss Harvey took after one
day out here in the hills?”

The other regarded him with a grunt and an imprecation that made the hot
blood of the cowpuncher spin in his brain.

“I’m talking for your good, not mine, son,” he said. “You can come in
with me and be turned over to the law, or else you can talk out free and
give us some dope that’ll be useful. That’s all. I hold it in your favor
that you’re the gent the girl chased, because you didn’t turn around and
shoot back. At least you. . . .”

“Orders stopped me,” gruffly informed the captive. “I’d’ve fixed her
right and proper . . . that snip! . . . but orders stopped me. I
couldn’t drive a slug into her. Hadn’t been for that, she wouldn’t have
drove me through the hills like she did. Not her nor no other woman!”

Chuck Neilan regarded the bestial face with a shudder of disgust and
shame—shame that such a creature should be called a man. In his revolt
and disgust he cast about in his mind for some means of inflicting
torment on his man. But Joe Purchass would tend to that, and, from what
he had seen of the big rancher, it would go hard, indeed, with his
present companion when Purchass took charge of the prisoner.

“Maybe,” said Chuck fiercely, “you ain’t going to enjoy this nice little
ride to the ranch house with me and the moon and all that. I’ll give you
a bit of news that’ll make you cheer up, son. Joe Purchass himself is
coming down to the ranch. And he’ll be the one to take charge of you.”

There was a gasp from the rider of the gray horse.

“Purchass? You lie!”

“I’m telling you the truth. Purchass is coming. You’ll sweat for your
work, son.”

But there was more courage in his prisoner than Chuck had expected. He
tossed back his heavy head on his wide shoulders and chuckled. “Leave me
and my troubles be,” he growled when he was done with his contemptuous
laughter. “You can’t bluff me. I’m going to stay in the house tonight
for a good sleep in a good bed. But I ain’t going to stay long. I got
business other places. You or Purchass . . . or a dozen like you . . .
you don’t worry me none. Get along to the house. I’m tired. I need
rest.”




                                   IX
                         “PURCHASS TAKES A HAND”


The calm insolence of the ruffian irritated Chuck almost to the point of
striking a helpless man. He restrained himself with gritted teeth, and
they made on steadily toward the old ranch house. A tumult of noise
about the Harvey place—the barking of dogs and the trampling of many
horses in the barn—announced the coming of Joe Purchass and his picked
men for the clean-up on the Harvey ranch.

“There you are,” said Chuck, pointing. “There’s the men that are going
to see you in a couple of minutes, you skunk. If they’s any fear inside
of you, get ready to shake.”

But the man on the gray horse merely shrugged.

“What’s your name?” asked Chuck fiercely.

“Bud Tucker.”

“Bud, by my way of thinking, you got about half an hour to live. I’m
damned near sorry for you, friend. They’ll tear you to pieces, those
boys will, when they see the gent that’s been hounding a helpless girl
here in the Miller Hills. And when they start for you, take care of
yourself, because I ain’t going to step in between. Now, get on!”

This last threat seemed to have some effect upon the bulky rustler. He
rode with his head turning rapidly from side to side, as though even at
this moment he was still in hope of rescue. In a moment more they were
in front of the first barn, and half a dozen men poured out of it from
their work of unsaddling and feeding their horses to cluster around
Chuck and the man who sat, bound hand and foot, on the gray, blinking at
them with his little brute eyes.

“I caught this hound,” explained Chuck to the quiet-eyed little
semicircle. “I caught him over yonder in the hills. When he seen me, he
took off and didn’t wait for no questions to be asked. Ain’t no doubt
that he’s one of the gents that’ve been bothering Miss Harvey. Look him
over, boys. Ain’t he a man-sized skunk for you?”

They voted slowly, one by one, but unanimously, that he was that and
worse. At first there was no flare of rage among them such as Chuck had
expected. He wondered at it while he untied the rope and allowed the man
to slip down from the horse. But as he landed on his feet and stood
blinking rapidly about him, a hoarse-throated murmur rose from the
group. They closed more thickly about him.

“Well,” said one, “what you got to say for yourself?”

He who had called himself Bud Tucker shrank back until his shoulders
struck against the side of the gray.

“You-all wait till I’m examined regular and proper,” he growled. “How
come you talk so big to me? What d’you know about me?”

“I know you’re a hound,” quoth the first interrogator. “You might make
tolerable good fertilizer, son, and we ain’t got much other use for your
kind around these parts. Understand?”

The broad-shouldered captive merely shrugged his shoulders.

“You do the talking now,” he averred. “I’ll do it later.”

“Why,” muttered one of the cowpunchers, “he ain’t a bit flustered. Get
Joe Purchass out, and see if that don’t throw a scare into him. Joe’s a
devil when he gets started on anything. Eh?”

They nodded and smiled fiercely.

“Go get your Joe Purchass,” said the rustler, quite indifferent to their
chosen threat. “That don’t bother me none. He’ll see justice done,
maybe.” And he sneered at them, one by one.

He had carried his carelessness a step too far, however, and now a lean,
tall man, hard as steel and as flexible, stepped close to him.

“Do I know you?” he said. “Ain’t you Bud Thomas of Winterville?”

“Me? No. Name’s Tucker.”

“Tucker nothing!” shouted the cowpuncher. “I recollect you plumb perfect
now. It was you that worked the crooked dice in a crap game that cleaned
me up a couple of years back. I been waiting to pay you for that, son,
and here’s the first installment!”

As he spoke, without warning his brown fist whipped up and back and then
shot into the face of Tucker-Thomas of Winterville, and the shorter,
bulkier man dropped flat on his back as though he had been shot. There
was a growl of savage agreement from the other cowpunchers. They closed
in. A man who will cheat in a crap game is bad enough; a man who hounds
a helpless girl is, of course, still worse; and a man who could do both
of these things was lower than contempt. The faces of the cowboys were
hard and set as they jerked the victim to his feet again, and even Chuck
Neilan, that inveterate lover of fair play, looked on with a nod. If
they beat the breath out of this scoundrel, he would be getting no more
than was his due. Yet he would take no part in the maltreatment.

Standing back, he saw them close in like hungry greyhounds around a
coyote. He heard their voices raised. They were pouring forth an
increasingly hot indictment upon the head of Tucker-Thomas. Hands
raised—fell—and a snarl, animal-like in quality, answered the blows.

“I seen a barrel of tar,” said one inspired voice. “I seen it in the
wagon shed. Let’s give him a roll in it.”

“And then roll him again in a pile of feathers,” said a second.

A yell of approbation followed, and then the voice of Thomas rose.

“Purchass!” he screamed. “Joe Purchass! Help!”

“Shut up, you dog,” cautioned one of the cowpunchers. “Shut up. It’ll be
all the worse for you if Purchass sees you and hears what you been
doing. He’s sweet on the girl, you fool, and he’ll break you in pieces,
inch by inch, when he comes.”

But the wretched man persisted in screaming for Joe Purchass, and
presently the kitchen door of the house banged open, and a tall form
appeared, running toward them through the night.

“What’s going on out here?” roared the great voice of Purchass, rolling
out in a volume that Chuck Neilan had guessed was possible when he first
had talked with the big rancher that day.

“They’re aiming to kill me!” screamed Thomas. “They’re talking about tar
and feathers and . . . !”

“What the devil’s all this?” queried Purchass. Striding through the
group, he caught Thomas by the nape of the neck and jerked him to his
feet.

“Keep ’em off!” groaned Thomas, clinging to the big man. “D’you see ’em?
They’re planning on killing me!”

“Keep away, you swine,” commanded the rancher, kicking the smaller man
breathlessly away from him.

Thomas stood now at arm’s length and repaid the kick of his protector
with a writhing back of his upper lip that exposed a row of dog-like
fangs. Purchass looked down at the fellow as though there were pollution
in merely laying eyes on him.

“Who got . . . this?” he asked.

A chorus of voices declared Chuck Neilan to be the man, and Chuck felt
that there was something more than ordinary surprise in the start with
which the big fellow turned to him.

“Hello, Neilan. I been hearing a lot about you. You’ve dropped down in
the Miller Hills like young Lochinvar, and now I see that you’ve made a
hero of yourself. Glad to see you again!”

He turned back to the others.

“I’ll take care of this gent, boys. I know you’d like to do for him,
with trimmings, but murder doesn’t help anybody along these days. We’d
have to answer for it to someone, even if it was only Thomas that we
cleaned up. I’ll take charge of him.”

They growled protest, but they could not interfere. Joe Purchass was
turning away when he remembered Chuck and turned to him again.

“Come along. Kate has been talking about you. Come along to the house. I
think there’s room enough for you in there. We’ll make out some way.”

Nevertheless, though he made his voice hearty, Chuck could not avoid an
impression that the words were exactly the reverse of the real meaning
of Purchass. There had been, Chuck thought, a strange malevolence in the
glance with which Purchass had first singled him out. However, he was
too glad of the results of that night’s work, and too eager to see Kate
Harvey again, to spend much time and thought on small details such as
this. If there was any doubt about the criminality of Thomas, it was
removed the moment he was brought inside the house and Kate’s eyes fell
on him. She shrank a little and then blazed into wrath. It was, indeed,
the man she had seen riding the gray horse.

She had difficulty in finishing this speech, because of the howling of a
dog in the upper part of the house—a strange, unearthly, and weird
sound.

“Have you brought the kennels into the house, Kate?” asked Purchass with
some irritability.

“It’s that greyhound I brought over from Graham City,” said the girl
apologetically, but flushing at the sharpness in the voice of Purchass,
Chuck thought. “He’s homesick. He nearly goes frantic outdoors. So I put
him in a room in the old wing of the house. I take him out for a run
twice a day, and I go up to see him once in a while besides. He’s
growing accustomed to things by degrees. He’s nowhere near as noisy now
as he used to be.”

“A dog in a house,” broke out Purchass, and then swallowed the rest of
his words before they got past his teeth. He had already spoken too
much, however, and Chuck saw a flash of anger pass between them.
Doubtless Purchass wanted to marry this girl. The sending of the emerald
had been a message and a symbol, beyond question. But if ever they were
united, Chuck shrewdly foresaw many a clash of opposing wills.

The big rancher rapidly diverted the talk to another topic, the first
that came to his mind, and this happened to be the courage of Chuck
Neilan, who had just brought home this captive. As for Thomas, he would
rope the man like a dog, he said, and throw him in an upstairs room
until tomorrow, when a buckboard could take the scoundrel to Graham City
to wait for his trial. So saying, he strode out of the room and left the
girl facing Chuck.

“You caught him all by yourself?” she said. “Why, even Joe Purchass
hasn’t been able to do as much as that.”

“Plain luck,” said Chuck modestly. “And even if it weren’t, you’d better
not tell Mister Purchass.”

She started to protest, changed her mind, flushed, and immediately
changed the subject. During the rest of the time that they spoke
together that evening, her manner was constrained. Continually Chuck
found her looking up and searching him with side glances. Plainly she
was afraid that he had looked a little too deeply into the mind of her
husband to be, and there were things in that mind of which the girl was
frankly ashamed.




                                   X
                             “A GIRL’S FEAR”


All of this made matter for serious reflection, and not altogether
unpleasant reflection, for Chuck Neilan. It employed him on the way to
the room to which he was assigned. It grew large in his sleepy
imagination as he slipped between the sheets of his bed, and it passed
into his dreams as the fatigue of that heavy day of labor swept over him
and blotted out the world.

He was wakened in the earliest gray of the dawn by a clamor in the
house, and then by the shrill wailing of the captive greyhound. Chuck
rushed downstairs half dressed and learned from a raging Joe Purchass,
who stormed up and down the living room like a maniac, what had
happened. By some mysterious resource of deviltry, Thomas had managed to
get a knife and cut his bonds during the night. Then he had sneaked out
to the barn, picked out and saddled the matchless bay gelding Purchass
rode, and slipped away like a ghost on this horse. And so great was the
speed of the bay that no attempt was made at pursuit. There was nothing
to be done except to send to Graham City as soon as possible and make
the wires hot, informing every sheriff within a wide radius of what had
happened.

At the conclusion of this narrative, Purchass dropped into a chair and
buried his face in his hands in despair, from which even the pretty
coaxing of Kate Harvey could not rouse him. Chuck himself, much as he
had come to dislike and to envy the rancher, could not help pitying him
now. The vicious little pinto itself had found a place deep in the heart
of Chuck, and he pitied with all of his soul a man who had lost such a
charger as the bay. But there was nothing more to be accomplished. Chuck
went back to his bed and fell at once into a sounder sleep than ever.

When he wakened, it was with a guilty start, for the sun of the late
morning was pouring into his room. Not in half a dozen years had he
slept so late as this. When he hurried down the stairs, Kate Harvey met
him with laughter, and her old father cackled behind her. All the men
had ridden off long before. They had gone out with Purchass to scour the
Miller Hills and hunt for the lost cattle of the Harvey ranch. When
Chuck asked indignantly why he had not been called to join the hunt, he
was told that they knew he had ridden a desperately long distance the
day before. But if he wanted hunting, he could have his share on the
succeeding days, for Purchass had announced his determination to run
through every nook of the Miller Hills with a fine-tooth comb until he
found the missing stock, even if he required a thousand men for the
task.

This last item was confided to Chuck with pride by Mr. Harvey, who took
an immense satisfaction in the wealth of his son-in-law to be. He was a
talkative old fellow on all topics, as a matter of fact. While Kate
hurried a breakfast onto the table for Chuck, Mr. Harvey overrode all of
her hints and her suggestions and insisted on telling the whole story.

“Because,” said Harvey, “there’s nothing to be ashamed of in it. What
happened was sure to happen. And it served you right. Can’t deny that,
Kate. It served you right for being as stubborn as a mule.”

He went on with his narrative. It seemed that, when Joe Purchass came
West to take charge of the family estate something over a year before,
he had at once met and fallen desperately in love with Kate Harvey. But
Kate was too occupied with business affairs to pay much heed to wooers.
She had been running the ranch for a year, and, under her direction,
while it could not be said that the place was prosperous, at least she
had arrested the rapid decline into which it was falling under the
management of her crippled father. In vain, Purchass besieged her. At
length she confessed to him that business meant more to her than men
just now, and that, when it was otherwise, she would send to him for
help so soon as the business at the ranch became too much for her to
handle, as he had repeatedly warned her it would become. Out of the
impulse of a romantic moment she had agreed on a symbol, which was to be
one of a pair of emerald earrings that an old Mexican woman had sold to
Mr. Harvey.

For some time things had gone very well, but after a while the cattle
began to disappear with astonishing frequency, and it was plain that
rustlers were at work. She had made frantic efforts to locate the
thieves but always without avail, until at length she had given up—the
ranch being on the point of bankruptcy—and had sent the emerald by
Chalmers to Joe Purchass, who received it after it had traveled along
the dubious route already described.

As for Chuck Neilan, he heard the tale with a singular leap of the
heart. Business chains were not the sort of chains that could bind Kate
Harvey. Little as he knew of her, he knew this. In that Joe Purchass had
not perceived so much as this gave him a great sense of superiority over
the rich man. Moreover, there were immediate consolations for having
missed the roundup of the rustlers that was underway today. Kate was
about to take a gallop to exercise the greyhound, Emperor, and out went
Chuck Neilan at her side. They kept a hot pace over the hills for half
an hour or more—slow going was simply no exercise at all for Emperor,
the girl averred—and then they swung in a slower circuit back toward
the house, with Emperor straining at the leash and cutting off toward
Graham City. He tugged until the arm of Chuck ached from the pull, and
the girl told how twice the hound had broken away from her on similar
occasions and raced over the mountains all the half dozen miles to
Graham City.

By the time that ride was finished and the dog restored to his room in
the old, unoccupied wing of the house, the lower floor of which was used
for storing supplies, Kate and Chuck had grown fairly intimate. She had
told into his sympathetic ear, for instance, the full story of her
struggle to make the ranch a paying proposition. And he, in return, had
regaled her with a few tales extracted at random out of his own
adventures. Last of all he told of the gold mine which he had fairly
blundered upon.

“And why on earth,” cried the girl, “didn’t you stay to work it and
watch it and develop it?”

Chuck rubbed his ear in embarrassment. “I’ll tell you how it is,” he
confessed at length. “I have a hunch working in me that you never can
get a thing that you don’t work for. Well, I didn’t work for that gold.
I just bull lucked it and found the stuff. I didn’t take no chances nor
no risks. I’ll simply make a fool of myself someday when I go back and
spend what they’re digging out of them rocks for me. But the money ain’t
got me yet, and I ain’t got the money . . . all of it.”

She listened to this unique exposition with a smile, but they had no
chance to continue the talk, for they had reached the house, and the
horses and dog had to be put away.

There followed a lazy time around the house. No one returned from Joe
Purchass at noontime. The afternoon wore away, and still there was no
messenger from the leader of the hunters. Chuck Neilan, toward dusk,
began to grow wild with excitement.

“He’s struck something in the line of big game,” he declared, “because,
otherwise, he wouldn’t be riding his hosses this long. Wouldn’t be
surprised if they’s some powder burning somewheres up yonder in them
Miller Hills, Miss Harvey.”

As he spoke, he fell into an agony of suspense at the very thought. The
evening wore on. The sun set, the color faded from the west, and the
streak of yellow-orange that banded the horizon went out by dim degrees.
Looking up to the sky, in which these changes had been taking place, one
saw that it still seemed comparatively bright, but, looking down to the
earth, one became aware that deep night was about to descend upon the
hills.

It was through this dusk that they came, a myriad of voices, a myriad of
tossing heads and horns, and Kate and Chuck ran out to see and to cheer.
For it was Joe Purchass returning, and before him and his men rolled a
dense herd of cattle. In five minutes the triumphant hunter was sitting
at the table with the dust not yet shaken from his shoulders, eating
ravenously. Down the table sat four of his henchmen, silent, dour
fellows. The men who had first come over from the Purchass ranch had
been sent in to Graham City to spend the night, thence to ride back to
the home ranch on the following day. These new hands had come down and
joined during the day. As for the explanation of the finding of the
cattle, it was extremely simple.

Joe Purchass, his heavy voice rolling and rumbling, told the tale of how
the cattle had drifted off the ranch and down into the lower ravines,
where they found better grass and more water, and where they were not
discovered simply because she, a woman, had not known how to hire
efficient cowhands, and because the lazy fellows she did hire had only
made a pretense of searching for the stock. No doubt this herd he had
found did not represent half of her losses. Beyond a question the
numbers of wandering cows had drawn thieves. But the rustling would
cease from this point. She could rest assured of that. The hound who had
stolen the bay gelding would spread among his fellows the word that Joe
Purchass had come down to run the ranch, and this, Purchass felt, would
put an end to the lawlessness.

He announced this, Chuck felt, with unpardonable swagger, while the four
dark-faced henchmen at the lower end of the table grunted in
acquiescence. The manner of Purchass, indeed, was growing intolerably
possessive. He lolled back in his chair when he had finished his dinner
and looked about him with dull, careless eyes, basking in the admiration
old Harvey poured out on him, the admiration of withered age for youth
and strength and victory above all.

But in the meantime, Chuck saw that Kate, sitting beside him at the
table, was growing paler and paler and more and more silent. Whenever he
stole a glance at her, he saw that she was rewarding the talkative
Purchass with smiles, but he saw also that those smiles were purely
automatic. Several times he invited her with significant looks to share
her discontent with him, but she seemed to misunderstand or not to see
his glances. It was not until the meal was come to dessert that she
dropped her napkin, and Chuck, leaning to retrieve it for her, found
that she was leaning also. He instantly knocked the napkin far under his
chair and had to lean farther down to fumble for it. That delay gave her
a chance to murmur in his ear. And what she said froze his blood.

“Chuck Neilan, there’s something wrong. There’s something wrong with the
face of Joe Purchass. There’s something devilish about it that I can’t
quite remember. What is he? Who is he? And why . . . why am I so filled
with fear?”




                                   XI
                           “THE WOLF EXPOSED”


The significance of that soul-chilling whisper made its way slowly into
the brain of Chuck Neilan. Gradually he began to understand that what he
himself had guessed at had not been entirely wrong. It had seemed to him
that the rancher was, indeed, changed, that he had discarded something
like a mask from his face. His eyes, as Chuck straightened and handed
the napkin to the girl with a smile, were flaming straight at Neilan
with such a glance as Chuck would never forget. And after that, no
matter how the talk ran, no matter how Purchass chattered away to please
the greedy ear of Mr. Harvey, he reserved time and attention, now and
again, to dart a heart-withering glance at Chuck.

Just what was the meaning of those glances, Chuck could not be sure, but
at least he was confident that the rancher was intensely hostile. And
more than hostile, he was venomously suspicious of every word and glance
Chuck directed at Kate Harvey. So much the cowpuncher could tell. In the
meantime, Purchass became momentarily more and more the new self that
had alarmed Kate. Confident, it seemed, that the sending of the emerald,
and then his work in reclaiming so many of the lost cattle, represented
facts that indicated the complete surrender of Kate, Purchass was
letting down the bars. And the real self that was now discovered was
complacent, careless, confident to a degree that had startled Kate
herself, and that had drawn her on to further observations. Chief of
these, perhaps, were the same eyes that had startled Chuck—the bright,
steady gray eyes that gleamed out beneath the straight, closely penciled
brows of the big man.

What did the girl mean by saying that the rancher reminded her of
someone? Why should she not have seen the resemblance before today? But
even now, Chuck could see she was struggling patiently with her memory,
and twice she bowed her head and rested her forehead in her hand, a mute
symbol of the effort of her concentration. From the face of Purchass,
then, she looked earnestly down the table toward the four dark faces of
the followers of Purchass. In fact, there was something strange about
these men. They were as ill-omened a quartet as Chuck had ever observed
in all the days of his wild experience in the mountain desert.

A peculiar alarm grew in him, unquestionably the result of the strange
whisper of the girl. He remembered now, with a qualm, that he had left
his cartridge belt and gun hanging on a peg against the wall in the wash
shed. For who would go into a perfectly friendly house and sit down with
the encumbrance of a six-shooter burdening one’s thigh? Only after he
was seated did he notice that each of the gloomy and silent four
retained their guns, and the big rancher likewise. It had not troubled
him before, but now it returned as an insidious source of worry.

Kate Harvey had risen slowly from her chair and crossed around the table
until she came to the left of the chair of Purchass.

“Joe,” she said solemnly, “I have a question to ask you before all these
people as witnesses. Will you answer me on your word of honor?”

“Word of honor?” grumbled Joe Purchass. “My dear, has your friend across
the table been pumping fool ideas in your head?”

“This is an idea of my own. Will you answer me, Joe?”

“Of course . . . of course. What is it, Kate?”

“Where were you six years ago tonight?”

The result was perfectly startling. First Chuck Neilan saw the four
cowpunchers at the end of the table straighten out with a jerk, and
their uneasy eyes worked from side to side as if to hunt for a loophole
of escape. After that, he saw nothing save the face of Purchass himself.
He had read about men changing color and the sweat pouring out on their
foreheads—all as the result of a phrase or two. But he had never seen
it until this moment when it was exemplified in the countenance of
Purchass.

Now that portion of his face that was not obscured with a forest of
beard and whiskers and sideburns turned from deep tan to a grisly gray,
and this in turn gave place to a tinge of purple. At the same time the
forehead became white and glistened with a thick dew of sweat. All of
this, moreover, took place on the instant that he heard the question. He
turned, strangely enough, not toward the girl, but toward Chuck Neilan,
and his eyes glowed like the eyes of a demon. There was no question
about it now. He was, as the saying went, bad medicine, and he was
particularly bad for Chuck.

The effect of this change in the face of Purchass was indescribably
great in Chuck. It was still greater in the girl, for she sank against
the table, staring in fear at the half-averted face of the rancher.

“Six years ago?” said Purchass, but the careless words were uttered in a
husky, almost choked voice. “Let me see. I’m trying to remember.”

Then, as though he saw that the emotion in his voice was betraying him,
he started around in his chair and glared at her.

“Why do you ask, Kate? Has Neilan put you up to this nonsense, my dear?”

Her reply was very strange. It did not consist in words, but, making a
quick gesture, she buried her fingers in the dark brown, richly curling
hair of Purchass and tore it from his head. Such literally was what she
did. The whole mass of hair covering the top of the man’s head came away
and exposed the pale skin beneath. The startled brain of Chuck Neilan,
working in stumbling fashion, had hardly grasped the fact that the girl
had torn a wig from the head of the big man, when her own scream went
ringing into his ears and thrilling and quivering along his nerves  “The
Wolf! Good Lord! The Wolf!”

And she cowered away against the wall, burying her face in her hands.

Chuck Neilan waited, agape. Had the big rancher decided to act in the
first instant, he could have blown Chuck to a thousand pieces. But for
one moment, perhaps, he hesitated, uncertain as to whether he might not
laugh the accusation to scorn. In that moment of indecision, some
assurance returned to Chuck. His blood began to flow more freely, and
when Purchass, finally realizing that the game he had played so long was
up, pushed back his chair with set teeth and scowling brows, Chuck drew
back his own and prepared to bolt for the door.

“You first,” said Purchass. “You put this into her head. You’ve been my
bad luck ever since you came across my trail. Now, Neilan. . . .”

But Chuck had dived for the door—literally dived to upset the aim of
the other, if the rancher should fire. He swung one shoulder sidewise
and smashed into the door, knocking it wide and catapulting through at
the same time that the gun roared from the hand of The Wolf—who had
been—Joe Purchass.

Once outside that door, Chuck rolled to his feet and, with a roar of
footfalls and voices behind him, plunged down the hall. He made for the
side door, but, when he crashed into it, he found that it was locked,
and, as he reached for the key, a gun boomed loud as a cannon in the
narrow hall behind him. There was no chance to wait even the split part
of a second. The heavy .45-caliber slug crashed into the door beside his
head. Chuck turned to his left and bounded up the stairs, as a second
shot nipped him stingingly in the shoulder. But it was only a scratch
that served as a spur to make him bolt up the steps in longer leaps. At
the head of those stairs he turned to his right and rushed for the end
room. He might gain the outside in this manner and so reach the horses.

His first glance out the window showed him one of Purchass’s men
standing outside with Colt poised in his hand, with the lamplight
streaming over him from a window in the dining room. Back again Chuck
Neilan bolted and thundered into the hallway in time to be greeted by
the roar of three revolvers directly behind him. Purchass and two of his
followers were coming for the assault.

There was only one thing to do, unless he preferred to rush into the
flaming muzzles of those guns that had missed him so far only because of
the dimness of the lights. Chuck took the other alternative, and,
wheeling to the left, he bolted for the unoccupied old wing of the house
where only the greyhound now lived. Down the hallway he plunged as he
had never raced before, with a shout of savage triumph from the throat
of Purchass behind him.

The end of the hall was the door to the room where the big dog was
quartered. He wrenched it open, slammed it behind him, and turned the
lock. The next instant a heavy weight crashed against it, and it sagged
in with a great creaking. It was a barrier to the pursuit, but it was a
barrier that would endure for only an instant.

He leaped across the room, with the dog whining with excitement at his
feet, and smashed the window there. He looked down. The night was dark,
but he could see the ground distinctly. It was instant death to drop
that distance. Groaning with impotence, he turned away, while the hound
reared, planted its forepaws on the window sill, and then whined with
eagerness and fear as even it recoiled from the drop to the solid earth
below.

With his brain whirling in the search for expedients, Chuck looked
around him. It was plain enough, this catastrophe that had happened. The
Wolf, a man of good family gone bad, had disappeared some six years ago,
and then, trusting to a wig and a growth of hair to disguise a face
never plainly seen by even his closest followers, he had come back to
claim his heritage and incidentally to attempt to marry Kate Harvey. So
much for this devil who merited, Chuck could see, all that had been said
about him.

As for the plan of The Wolf now, it was equally simple. By killing
Chuck, he removed the one strong witness against him. He could then take
Harvey and the girl, through the agency of his four followers, up into
the hills until she consented to marry him. This accomplished, he could
return and take his place in the world, giving any number of good
reasons for having killed Chuck Neilan.

There were things unexplained in this brief summary, but Chuck saw all
of this in one flash. The next instant he groaned as the door sagged
under the weight of a new assailant. If he were to find escape now, he
must act with the speed of the wind. The dog, standing on his hind legs
at the window, looked around over its shoulder and seemed to beg for
speed with its whine.

That whine gave Chuck his idea. He tore off the coat and vest and ripped
a section from the front of his shirt. That would do for something to
write on. But ink?

He used the readiest alternative for ink. He jerked out a penknife,
pricked the end of his right forefinger, jabbing it until the flow was
free and then, spreading the cloth against the wall with his left hand,
guessing at his letters in the dark, he wrote 

                   Murder. Harvey’s ranch. The Wolf.

That message should convey his meaning, short though the words might be.
He ran to the greyhound, tore one end of the cloth in two, and tied it
in the collar. Then he lifted the heavy, sprawling brute to the window.
There was a snarl, a frightened whine, and teeth clashed an inch from
his face as the terrified dog discovered his purpose. But the next
instant Emperor had been pushed out head foremost into empty air.

The door crashed down behind him, and a roar of voices filled the room.
But Chuck Neilan crammed his shoulders into the narrow window and peered
downward, regardless of what had happened elsewhere. He saw Emperor land
with a thud, lie a moment inert, then rise, stagger, trot, and suddenly
skim away into the night with great bounds.

The next moment he was torn away from the window and went crashing to
the floor with the weight of two men bearing down upon him.




                                  XII
                             “KATE’S ANSWER”


They brought him downstairs, Joe Purchass, alias The Wolf, carrying him
with as much ease as though he had been a child. In the dining room they
found old Harvey close to collapse, cowering in his chair in the corner.
Kate Harvey stood beside the window, pale, but otherwise calm enough.
The calm was broken for an instant as she saw Chuck Neilan brought,
living, before her. What had passed made them close to each other. There
was an impulsive gesture of both hands thrown out.

“Chuck!” she cried, and there was a world of meaning in the single
word—so much that Purchass turned sharply on her.

He made no response, however, and beckoned to the guard, who had
remained to watch these two, to lower his revolver and stand back. He
was obeyed in silence. The fourth of the men now appeared and closed the
outer door to the kitchen. He also took his place in silence, with an
unperturbed expression. But the eyes of each of the four, like the eyes
of so many dogs, followed every movement of the leader.

Purchass took up an easy position in the center of the room where he
could keep everything in view.

“We’re about to start on a little trip, Kate,” he said. “We’re going to
leave a note or two to inform neighbors, perhaps. Then we’re going for a
jaunt up into the hills. No fear.” His face blackened as he saw that her
eyes were riveted upon Chuck Neilan. “No fear, Chuck is going with us.
We can’t leave dead men behind.”

A faint cry came from the girl. But The Wolf raised his hand to silence
her. “Stop that! Do you think we’ll kill him and then take him? Nor your
father, either, my dear. You good people are going on a little excursion
with me, and with these four faithful fellows of mine to take care of
us. Up there, I hope, you’ll make up your mind to marry me, and I’ll see
that a book and a man are brought for the purpose, together with a
license and all things necessary. That marriage, I think, will shut your
mouth and the mouth of your father. As for Neilan, he’s a very honest
man, eh? Well, I’ll extract a very solemn promise from Neilan. That will
have to be our program.”

As he spoke, he sent a dour glance at Chuck. No question about the
nature of the promise he would extract. It would be a request pointed
with the muzzle of a gun and signed in burning powder.

“I’m telling you this, Kate,” said the leader, as the girl made no
reply, “because I want you to understand immediately exactly where we
are, and what we are doing. If you won’t consent, I shall not carry you
a step.”

The girl exclaimed faintly, incredulously, and at the unbelieving hope
in her face Purchass grew pale.

“Not a step would I carry you,” he repeated. “And neither would I carry
these two. I’d leave them behind in such shape that they’d never talk
. . . never.”

Chuck Neilan looked at the big man, wholly incredulous. It did not seem
possible that there was a man living capable of such unscrupulous
villainy. Again he glanced at the girl. She was utterly colorless, her
glance roving swiftly in agony from his own face to the face of her
father. That poor old man, broken by age and by his weakness of body,
crumpled farther into the corner and watched what was happening with
great, dumb eyes of fear.

“First,” said Purchass, sitting on the table and swinging one leg with a
carelessness of manner that Chuck knew did not represent his true mind,
“Kate, I want you to know some of the things which should be put on the
right side of the page and added up in my favor. Along with it, I’ll
tell you the bad things. Go back to a night six years ago, a night when
you woke up and saw The Wolf standing in the shaft of moon shine that
streamed in through your window. That night, Kate, I saw your face for
the first time. You were only a girl, but there was so much beauty and
purity in you, my dear, that, when I got clear of the house, I began to
think things over.

“You see, I had taken to deviltry . . . the life of The Wolf, who, by
the way, was never as bad as the fools say . . . not because I was
driven out of polite society, but simply because I wanted a few thrills.
Well, I got ’em! I went from bad to worse. I was going downhill fast,
until I saw you, Kate. That changed me. I saw that I’d have to put on
the brakes. And I did. I left the country. I spent nearly five years
getting used to a wig and growing a beard. When I came back, my own
family in the East did not recognize me. And certainly nobody in the
West knew me to be The Wolf. I’ve lived here a full year, and nobody
would ever have learned it if it hadn’t been for the working of your
instinct tonight . . . and the working of a woman’s instinct is a thing
against which men have no defense. It can’t be guarded against. Even now
no one knows except a few members of the old gang.

“I had to use them to break down your defense, Kate. They were the
cattle rustlers who stole your cattle. They were the fellows who broke
you down to such a point that you had to send that blessed emerald to
me. And these men won’t speak to inform against me. As to the others,
your father will do a good deal for the sake of a comfortable berth the
rest of his life . . . he won’t talk. And that leaves you and Neilan. As
my wife, you’ll be quiet, I suppose, and as for Neilan . . . well, I
shall extract a promise, eh? Then I am free, Kate, to go back to the
Purchass Ranch and continue my life exactly where I left off when I
saddled and came over here yesterday, except that I’ll have my wife with
me. Kate, do you understand? Do you consent?”

She quivered as though she had been struck with a whip. But as she
raised her head to answer, he checked her.

“Not yet,” he said. “Take half an hour or so to think things over from
every angle. At first, of course, you would detest me. But after a time
I am sure that you would feel far otherwise about matters. I am going
outside for a stroll. When I come back, you can say what you have to
say.”

With this he left the room, the outside door banged after him, and his
footfalls departed.

There began what was for Chuck Neilan and the girl the longest period of
waiting in their lives. Every moment was a year of life. While she
struggled through that grim problem, Chuck found her eyes reaching to
him across the room time and again, as though asking him mutely for
advice that she knew he could not give.

At last he burst out  “For heaven’s sake, do the thing that will keep
you straight with yourself. Your father’s an old man. And I’m a pretty
hard one. If either of us keeps on living because you’ve gone into a
living death, d’you think . . . ?”

A snarl from one of the guards cut his generous speech short, but his
meaning had been made clear enough, and he was rewarded with a glint of
moist eyes and a sad shake of the head from the girl. Then she dropped
her face in her hands and waited, with strong shudders shaking her now
and again. From without a whistled note drew two of the guards away.
After five minutes more there was a sound of approaching horses and the
faint squeaking of stirrups jouncing in the stirrup leathers. The Wolf
was making ready to start his journey, and in a moment or so he would be
among them ready to ask for the answer. How long it had been since he
left the room, no one in it could have undertaken to guess, though
surely it had been at least the half hour he had promised to give them.

A little later the door opened softly, and the big rancher stood before
them with the wig once more in place on his head. That act of
self-deception made Chuck Neilan nearly smile.

There was no doubt in Chuck’s mind about what answer the girl would
give. She answered the final question steadily enough  “I’ll go with
you, and I’ll marry you . . . and heaven forgive you if men ever find
out what you are. But these two are safe?”

She pointed to Chuck and her father.

“Absolutely,” said The Wolf, nodding. “And. . . .”

A hiss from one of his followers made him start. Instantly the man who
had been left outside called  “Chief! Quick!”

In a bound The Wolf was through the door, and then the cause of their
alarm was audible to those within the room—the mutter of rapidly
approaching hoofbeats—many and many of them—drumming up a blur of
sound.

“Harry . . . Lou!” thundered a voice outside—the voice of The Wolf.
“Come for your lives! The mountains have been turned into horsemen. But
kill Neilan first . . . kill him before you come!”

But Chuck Neilan, at the first order, caught the chair beside him and
hurled it across the room. It crashed against the lamp and flooded the
place with darkness. Twice a revolver exploded, fired with malevolent
abandon, and then the two stumbled through the doorway out to the wildly
cursing Wolf.

They started off with a sudden outburst of hoofbeats that faded as the
roar of the approaching party increased, swept nearer, and broke around
the ranch house. Those frantic riders who had nearly killed their horses
in the rush across the six miles of hills in response to the message
written in blood—those ready fighters, guns in hand, saw no signs of
the fugitives as the latter dipped down the hillside. The next moment
they were in the darkened room with only the stifled, hysterical sobbing
of a girl to guide them.

Someone flashed an electric torch. The round flare of light wavered a
moment and then picked out the age-dulled eyes of the father, and then
Kate Harvey, weeping in the arms of a tall, brown-faced stranger whose
right forefinger was gashed at the tip.




                           TRANSCRIBER NOTES

Misspelled words and printer errors have been corrected. Where multiple
spellings occur, majority use has been employed.

Punctuation has been maintained except where obvious printer errors
occur.

A cover was created for this eBook and is placed in the public domain.

[The end of  The Lost Valley  by Frederick Schiller Faust (as John
Frederick)]
