  A Distributed Proofreaders Canada eBook  

This ebook is made available at no cost and with very few restrictions.
These restrictions apply only if (1) you make a change in the ebook
(other than alteration for different display devices), or (2) you are
making commercial use of the ebook. If either of these conditions
applies, please contact a FP administrator before proceeding.

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be under copyright
in some countries. If you live outside Canada, check your country's
copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER COPYRIGHT IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT
DOWNLOAD OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE.

 Title   Science, Liberty And Peace
 Date of first publication   1947
 Author   Aldous Leonard Huxley
 Date first posted   May 22, 2015
 Date last updated   May 22, 2015
Faded Page eBook #20150551

This ebook was produced by  Marcia Brooks, Cindy Beyer & the online
Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at  




                       SCIENCE, LIBERTY AND PEACE




                            By ALDOUS HUXLEY 
                                 Novels 
                            APE AND ESSENCE
                         TIME MUST HAVE A STOP
                          AFTER MANY A SUMMER
                            EYELESS IN GAZA
                            BRAVE NEW WORLD
                          POINT COUNTER POINT
                          THOSE BARREN LEAVES
                               ANTIC HAY
                              CROME YELLOW
                               Biography 
                             GREY EMINENCE
                             Short Stories 
                             BRIEF CANDLES
                          TWO OR THREE GRACES
                             LITTLE MEXICAN
                              MORTAL COILS
                                 LIMBO
                       Essays and Belles Lettres 
                         THEMES AND VARIATIONS
                        THE PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY
                           THE ART OF SEEING
                             ENDS AND MEANS
                             MUSIC AT NIGHT
                        VULGARITY IN LITERATURE
                            DO WHAT YOU WILL
                             PROPER STUDIES
                             JESTING PILATE
                             ALONG THE ROAD
                             ON THE MARGIN
                           TEXTS AND PRETEXTS
                         BEYOND THE MEXIQUE BAY
                             THE OLIVE TREE
                                 Poetry 
                              THE CICADAS
                                  LEDA
                                 Drama 
                           THE GIOCONDA SMILE
                           THE WORLD OF LIGHT
                            Chatto & Windus 




                            SCIENCE, LIBERTY
                               AND PEACE

                                   By 
                             Aldous Huxley


                                1 9 5 0
                            CHATTO & WINDUS
                              L O N D O N




                              PUBLISHED BY
                            Chatto & Windus
                                 LONDON
                                   *
                        Clarke, Irwin & Co. Ltd.
                                TORONTO

            Applications regarding translation rights in any
            work by Aldous Huxley should be addressed
            to Chatto & Windus, 40 William IV Street,
                             London, W.C. 2

                          FIRST PUBLISHED 1947
                         SECOND IMPRESSION 1950

                    COPYRIGHT 1947 BY ALDOUS HUXLEY




                                   I


‘IF THE ARRANGEMENT of society is bad (as ours is), and a small number
of people have power over the majority and oppress it, every victory
over Nature will inevitably serve only to increase that power and that
oppression. This is what is actually happening.’

It is nearly half a century since Tolstoy wrote these words, and what
was happening then has gone on happening ever since. Science and
technology have made notable advances in the intervening years—and so
has the centralization of political and economic power, so have
oligarchy and despotism. It need hardly be added that science is not the
only causative factor involved in this process. No social evil can
possibly have only one cause. Hence the difficulty, in any given case,
of finding a complete cure. All that is being maintained here is that
progressive science is one of the causative factors involved in the
progressive decline of liberty and the progressive centralization of
power, which have occurred during the twentieth century.

Applied science touches the lives of individuals and societies at many
different points and in a great variety of contexts, and therefore the
ways in which it has increased the power of the few over the majority
are correspondingly many and various. In the paragraphs that follow I
shall enumerate the more obviously significant of these ways, shall
indicate how and by what means applied science has contributed hitherto
toward the centralization of power in the hands of a small ruling
minority, and also how and by what means such tendencies may be resisted
and ultimately, perhaps, reversed.

1. In the course of the past two or three generations science and
technology have equipped the political bosses who control the various
national states with unprecedentedly efficient instruments of coercion.
The tank, the flame-thrower and the bomber—to mention but a few of
these instruments—have made nonsense of the old techniques of popular
revolt. At the same time the recent revolutionary improvements in the
means of transport and communications have vastly strengthened the hands
of the police. In his own peculiar way, Fouché was a man of first-rate
abilities; but compared with the secret police force at the disposal of
a modern dictatorship or even of a modern democracy, the instrument of
oppression, which he was able to forge for Napoleon, was an absurdly
clumsy piece of machinery. In the past, personal and political liberty
depended to a considerable extent upon governmental inefficiency. The
spirit of tyranny was always more than willing; but its organization and
material equipment were generally weak. Progressive science and
technology have changed all this completely. Today, if the central
executive wishes to act oppressively, it finds an almost miraculously
efficient machine of coercion standing ready to be set in motion. Thanks
to the genius and co-operative industry of highly trained physicists,
chemists, metallurgists and mechanical inventors, tyrants are able to
dragoon larger numbers of people more effectively, and strategists can
kill and destroy more indiscriminately and at greater distances, than
ever before. On many fronts nature has been conquered; but, as Tolstoy
foresaw, man and his liberties have sustained a succession of defeats.

Overwhelming scientific and technological superiority cannot be resisted
on their own plane. In 1848 the sporting gun was a match for the muskets
of the soldiery, and a barricade made of overturned carts, sandbags and
paving stones was a sufficient protection against cavalry and
muzzle-loading cannon. After a century of scientific and technological
progress no weapons available to the masses of the people can compete
with those in the arsenals controlled by the ruling minority.
Consequently, if any resistance is to be offered by the many to the few,
it must be offered in a field in which technological superiority does
not count. In countries where democratic institutions exist and the
executive is prepared to abide by the rules of the democratic game, the
many can protect themselves against the ruling few by using their right
to vote, to strike, to organize pressure groups, to petition the
legislature, to hold meetings and conduct press campaigns in favour of
reform. But where there are no democratic institutions, or where a
hitherto democratic government declines any longer to abide by the rules
of the game, a majority which feels itself oppressed may be driven to
resort to direct action. But since science and technology, in conquering
nature have thereby enormously increased the military and police power
of the ruling few, this direct action cannot hope for a successful
outcome, if it is violent; for in any armed conflict, the side which has
the tanks, planes and flame-throwers cannot fail to defeat the side
which is armed at the very best only with small arms and hand grenades.

Is there any way out of the unfavourable political situation in which,
thanks to applied science, the masses now find themselves? So far only
one hopeful issue has been discovered. In South Africa and, later, in
India, Gandhi and his followers were confronted by an oppressive
government armed with overwhelming military might. Gandhi, who is not
only an idealist and a man of principle, but also an intensely practical
politician, attempted to cope with this seemingly desperate situation by
organizing a non-violent form of direct action, which he called
 satyagraha . For a full account of the methods and results of
 satyagraha  the reader is referred to  War without Violence  by
Krishnalal Shridharani (New York, 1939). Here it is only necessary to
state that the method achieved a number of striking successes against
odds which, from a military point of view, were overwhelmingly great. To
those who think that the record of Gandhi’s achievements is irrelevant
to the historical and psychological situation of the industrial West,
Mr. Shridharani makes the following answer 

    My contact with the Western world has led me to think that,
    contrary to popular belief,  satyagraha , once consciously and
    deliberately adopted, has more fertile fields in which to grow
    and flourish in the West than in the Orient. Like war,
     satyagraha  demands public spirit, self-sacrifice, organization
    and discipline for its successful operation, and I have found
    these qualities displayed in Western communities more than in my
    own. Perhaps the best craftsmen in the art of violence may still
    be the most effective wielders of non-violent direct action. It
    is but a question, in the words of William James, of
    ‘opinion-making men seizing historic opportunities.’

It is often argued that  satyagraha  cannot work against an organization
whose leaders are prepared to exploit their military superiority without
qualm or scruple. And of course this may very well be the case. No more
than any other form of political action, violent or otherwise, can
 satyagraha  guarantee success. But even though, against an entirely
ruthless and fanatical opponent, non-co-operation and what Thoreau
called ‘civil disobedience,’ coupled with a disciplined willingness to
accept and even to court sacrificial suffering, may prove unavailing,
the resulting situation could not be, materially, any worse than it
would have been if the intolerable oppression had been passively
accepted or else resisted unavailingly by force; while, psychologically
and morally, it would in all probability be very much better—better for
those participating in the  satyagraha  and better in the eyes of
spectators and of those who merely heard of the achievement at second
hand.

In the years ahead it seems possible that  satyagraha  may take root in
the West—not primarily as the result of any ‘change of heart,’ but
simply because it provides the masses, especially in the conquered
countries, with their only practicable form of political action. The
Germans of the Ruhr and the Palatinate resorted to  satyagraha  against
the French in 1923. The movement was spontaneous; philosophically,
ethically and organizationally, it had not been prepared for. It was for
this reason that it finally broke down. But it lasted long enough to
prove that a Western people—and a people more thoroughly indoctrinated
with militarism than any other—was perfectly capable of non-violent
direct action, involving the cheerful acceptance of sacrificial
suffering. Similar movements of  satyagraha  (more conscious of
themselves this time, and better prepared for) may again be initiated
among the masses of conquered Germany. The impracticability of any other
kind of political action makes it very possible that this will happen
sooner or later. It would be one of the happier ironies of history if
the nation which produced Klausewitz and Bernhardi and Hitler were to be
forced by circumstances to become the first large-scale exponent in the
West of that non-violent direct action which has become, in this age of
scientific progress, humanity’s only practical substitute for hopeless
revolution and self-stultifying or suicidal war.

2. The pen and the voice are at least as mighty as the sword; for the
sword is wielded in obedience to the spoken or the written word.
Progressive technology has strengthened the powers that be by providing
them not only with bigger and better instruments of coercion, but also
with instruments of persuasion incomparably superior to those at the
disposal of earlier rulers. The rotary press and, more recently, the
radio have contributed greatly to the concentration of political and
economic power. James Mill believed that, when everybody had learned to
read, the reign of reason and democracy would be assured for ever. But
in actual historical fact the spread of free compulsory education, and,
along with it, the cheapening and acceleration of the older methods of
printing, have almost everywhere been followed by an increase in the
power of ruling oligarchies at the expense of the masses. The reasons
for this are obvious. A newspaper combining attractiveness with
cheapness cannot be produced unless it is subsidized either by
advertisers (that is to say, the people who control centralized finance
and large-scale, mass-producing and mass-distributing industry), or by
some organization desirous, for its own purposes, of influencing public
opinion, or by the central government. In countries where the press is
said to be free, newspapers are subsidized primarily by advertisers, and
to a lesser extent by political parties, financial or professional
groups. In countries where the press is not free, newspapers are
subsidized by the central government. The man who pays the piper always
calls the tune. In capitalist democracies the popular press supports its
advertisers by inculcating the benefits of centralized industry and
finance, coupled with as much centralized government as will enable
these institutions to function at a profit. In totalitarian states all
newspapers preach the virtues of governmental omnipotence, one-party
politics and state control of everything. In both cases progressive
technology has strengthened the hands of the local bosses by providing
them with the means of persuading the many that concentration of
political and economic power is for the general benefit.

What is true of the press is equally true of the radio. Spoken words are
more exciting than words printed on wood pulp. In the past a great
orator could reach, at the most, only a few thousand listeners. Today,
thanks to applied science, a dictator with a gift of the gab is able to
pour his emotionally charged evangel into the ears of tens of millions.
What Mark Antony could do to the mob assembled round Caesar’s corpse,
his modern counterpart can do to entire nations. Never have so many been
so much at the mercy of so few.

Undesirable propaganda will not cease until the persons who pay for
propaganda either change their minds, or are replaced by other persons
willing to pay for something else. Meanwhile there is no remedy for the
evil except personal self-denial. Reading newspapers and listening to
the radio are psychological addictions; and psychological addictions,
like the physiological addictions to drugs, tobacco and alcohol, can
only be put an end to by a voluntary effort on the part of the addict.
So long as people yield to the craving to read about murders and
divorces and to look at the comic strips, or to listen to soap operas
and swing music, they must expect to be influenced by the propaganda
which always accompanies these habit-forming stimuli. A questionnaire on
reading habits was recently addressed by the heads of a New York labour
union to its membership. Among the questions asked were  What newspaper
do you regularly read? and what newspaper do you consider the least
trustworthy and most untruthful? Sixty per cent. of the membership
agreed that newspaper X was the most untruthful sheet in the New York
area, but over forty per cent. admitted to making it their daily
reading—because of its superior comic strips and more violent
sensationalism. As usual, it is a case of  video meliora proboque;
deteriora sequor —I see the better and I approve; but the worse is what
I pursue. Under the present dispensation, nothing but self-denial on the
part of readers can diminish the influence of newspaper X. Continued
indulgence in psychological addictions has to be paid for, and the price
is undesirable propaganda.

3. By supplying the ruling oligarchy with more effective instruments of
coercion and persuasion, applied science has contributed directly to the
centralization of power in the hands of the few. But it has also made
important indirect contributions to the same end. It has done this in
two ways; first, by introducing over ever larger areas of the industrial
and agricultural economy the methods of large-scale mass production and
mass distribution; second, by creating, through its very
progressiveness, an economic and social insecurity which drives all
those concerned, owners and managers no less than workers, to seek the
assistance of the national state. Let us now consider these two
power-centralizing factors in greater detail.

( a ) In applying the results of disinterested scientific research,
inventors and technicians have paid more attention to the problem of
equipping large concerns with the expensive machinery of mass production
and mass distribution than to that of providing individuals or
co-operating groups with cheap and simple, but effective, means of
production for their own subsistence and for the needs of a local
market. The reason for this is that there has been more money in working
for the mass producers and mass distributors; and the mass producers and
mass distributors have had more money because financiers have seen that
there was more profit for them, and more power, in a centralized than in
a decentralized system of production.

Here, in parenthesis, let us note that concentration of financial power
preceded the scientific revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries and was largely responsible for making our industrial
civilization the hateful thing it was and, for the most part, still is.
Throughout Europe, land and natural resources were not owned outright by
the people, represented by a multitude of small-holders; nor were they
the property of a sovereign, leasing to small tenants and spending the
rent (which is the monetary expression of the social value of land) for
social purposes. The best part of the land and its natural resources was
the monopoly of a small class of landlords, who appropriated the social
values of what should, quite obviously, have been everybody’s property,
to their own private use. Hence the early centralization of financial
power—a power that was used to exploit the new technological
discoveries for the benefit, not of individual small producers or
co-operating groups, but for that of the class which alone possessed
accumulations of money. Centralized finance begot centralized industry,
and in due course the profits of centralized industry increased the
power of centralized finance, so that it was able to proceed ever
further in the direction of completely centralized production and
distribution.

The centralizing of industrial capacity in big mass-producing factories
has resulted in the centralization of a large part of the population in
cities and in the reduction of ever-increasing numbers of individuals to
complete dependence upon a few private capitalists and their managers,
or upon the one public capitalist, the state, represented by politicians
and working through civil servants. So far as liberty is concerned,
there is little to choose between the two types of boss. Up to the
present, state-controlled enterprises have been closely modelled upon
those of capitalist big business. Nationalization has not stopped short
at land and natural resources, nor have the land and natural resources
been nationalized with the purpose of giving individuals or co-operating
groups free access to the means of small-scale production, personal
liberty and self-government. On the contrary, the objects nationalized
include, besides land and natural resources, the tools of production,
and that nationalization has been undertaken with a view to
strengthening the state (that is to say, the politicians momentarily in
power) against its subjects and not at all with the purpose of
liberating individual men and women from economic dependence upon
bosses. But economic dependence upon bosses is always bad, because,
quite obviously, it is not easily reconcilable with local and
professional self-government or with civil and personal liberty.
Democratic institutions are likely to work best at times and in places
where at least a good part of the citizens have access to enough land
and possess sufficient tools and professional skill to be able to
provide for their subsistence without recourse to financially potent
private capitalists or to the government. Where, as in the contemporary
Western world, great numbers of the citizens own nothing (not even, in
many cases, a skill, since the operation of semi-automatic machines does
not require a skill), personal liberty and political and civil rights
are to a more or less considerable extent dependent upon the grace of
the capitalistic or national owners and managers of the means of
production and distribution, and upon their willingness to abide by the
rules of the democratic game. To forward their interests and to protect
themselves against oppression, propertyless workers combine in trade
unions. These have done much to bridle the ambition and covetousness of
capitalists and to improve the conditions of labour. But trade unions
are as subject to giganticism and centralization as are the industries
to which they are related. Consequently it happens all too frequently
that the masses of unionized workers find themselves dependent upon, and
subordinated to, two governing oligarchies—that of the bosses and that
of the union leaders. Over the first they have no control at all, except
by strike and the threat of strike; over the second their control is at
best remote and rather shadowy. Self-government, which is the very
essence of democratic freedom, is more or less completely absent from
their professional lives. This is ultimately due, as we have seen, to
propertylessness and consequent dependence upon the private or public
owners and managers of the means of mass production and mass
distribution; and propertylessness is due in its turn to (among other
things) the progress of applied science—a progress which, under the
auspices of centralized finance, has hitherto favoured mass production
at the expense of production on a small scale for personal or
co-operative use, or to supply a local market.

In the most highly industrialized countries, applied science and its
ally, and master, centralized finance, have profoundly changed the
traditional pattern of agricultural life. Thus, in the United States,
the percentage of the population making its living from the land has
been reduced in recent years to only a fifth of the total. Meanwhile the
size of individual holdings of land has tended to increase, as powerful
corporations add field to field in the effort to exploit mechanized
farming to its economic limit. Small-scale farmers, who used to be
primarily concerned with subsistence, secondarily with a cash crop, have
been largely replaced by men whose primary concern is with cash crops
and who use the cash so earned to buy ‘nationally advertised,’ processed
and denatured foods at the grocer’s.

In Russia the process of centralizing and consolidating the control of
land and of industrializing agricultural production has been carried out
by government decree and by means of the liquidation of a whole class of
society. It would appear, however, that a measure of small-scale private
ownership, or quasi-ownership, has had to be reintroduced in order to
increase agricultural efficiency by improving the morale of the workers.

( b ) Among the ordinary results of the rapid progress of applied
science are technological unemployment and the sudden and unexpected
necessity of changing long-established habits of agricultural and
industrial production. When too rapid, changes of position or state are
very disturbing to living organisms, sometimes even fatal. That is why,
when we get out of a plane in mid-air, we use a parachute, why, when we
take a Turkish bath, we do not plunge immediately into the hottest
chamber. Analogously, social, economic and political changes can take
place too rapidly and too frequently for human well-being. A highly
progressive technology entails incessant and often very rapid and
startling changes of economic, political and ethical state; and such
changes tend to keep the societies subjected to them in a chronically
uncomfortable and unstable condition. Some day, perhaps, social
scientists will be able to tell us what is the optimum rate of change,
and what the optimum amount of it at any one time. For the present,
Western societies remain at the mercy of their progressive technologies,
to the intense discomfort of everybody concerned. Man as a moral, social
and political being is sacrificed to  homo faber , or man the smith, the
inventor and forger of new gadgets.

And meanwhile, of course, technological unemployment is always with us;
for every labour-saving device, every substitution of a new and more
efficient technique for an older and less efficient one, results in a
local and temporary diminution of the labour force. In the long run the
persons displaced, as the result of technological advance, may find
themselves reabsorbed by other industries or even (since increased
efficiency results in lowered prices, greater demand and an expansion of
production sufficient, in some cases, to offset the original
technological unemployment) by the industry from which they were
discharged. But what may happen in the long run is of little interest to
propertyless persons who are compelled by hunger and the elements to do
their living exclusively in the short run. For such persons the chief
consequence of progressive science is a chronic social and economic
insecurity.

Here, as in an earlier paragraph, it is necessary to stress the fact
that the progress of applied science is not the only causative factor
involved. Mass unemployment and periodical slumps have a variety of
interlocking causes—meteorological, financial and psychological causes
as well as those connected with science and technology. Concerning the
relative importance of these factors the experts are not yet agreed.
Many theories of slumps and unemployment have been formulated, each of
which emphasizes one of the known causative factors at the expense of
all the rest. None of these theories is universally accepted; but all of
them—and this, for our present purpose, is the important point—are
agreed that technological unemployment is a reality and that the
progress of applied science does in fact play an important part in
creating the economic and social insecurity which is the plague of
modern industrial societies.

In the capitalist countries the nature of the monetary and financial
systems has been such that, whenever a boom gets under way, the issuers
of credit are compelled by the traditional rules of banking to withdraw
credit and so to convert the boom into a slump. At the same time the
owners of mass-producing industry are compelled by the rules of the game
of profit-making to practise what Thorstein Veblen used to call
‘capitalist sabotage’—in other words, they are compelled by the
necessity of making profits to prevent their managers from producing as
many goods and at as cheap a rate as they are technically equipped to
do. In both cases the result of following the traditional rules is an
accentuation of the social and economic insecurity normally resulting
from technological progress. State socialists hold that the remedy for
these evils can be found only in the nationalization of banking, land
and Industry—in other words, in the complete and final centralization
of economic as well as political power in the hands of the currently
ruling politicians and their managers. But power is in its essence
expansive, and cannot be curbed except by other powers of equal or at
least comparable magnitude. Under a regime of state socialism there
would be no power systems within a community capable of opposing any
serious resistance to the politically and economically almighty
executive. The political bosses and civil servants in control of the
state would themselves be controlled by nothing stronger than a paper
constitution. In cases where state socialism succeeds capitalist
democracy by non-violent, constitutional means, the rules of the
political game are likely to remain, in many respects, identical with
those prevailing under the older regime. For as long as the new system
is administered by men brought up under democratic traditions, the
constitutional rules will probably be observed. But when these men are
succeeded by a new generation, born and brought up in a society
dominated by the omnipotent state, what then? Only the most ingenuously
optimistic, the most wilfully blind to the facts of history and
psychology, can believe that paper guarantees of liberty—guarantees
wholly unsupported by the realities of political and economic
power—will be scrupulously respected by those who have known only the
facts of governmental omnipotence on the one hand and, on the other, of
mass dependence upon, and consequently subservience to, the state and
its representatives.

We see, then, that technological progress results in economic and social
insecurity, and that this insecurity is greatly aggravated, in the
capitalist countries, by the necessity of abiding by the traditional
rules of private banking, financing and mass production. By
nationalizing, or at the least by rigidly controlling, industry,
agriculture and banking, the state could probably get rid of periodical
depressions and would be in a position to mitigate, by financial and
political measures, the worst consequences of scientific progress. In
this way the advantages of centralized finance, mass-producing industry
and quasi-industrial agriculture could be reconciled with social and
economic security for the masses. But everything has its price, and it
seems unlikely that security achieved in this way could for long
co-exist with that liberty under law which, as Acton was never tired of
insisting, is the end of all political action, all social and economic
arrangements.

At the present time the horrors of insecurity, as exemplified above all
in mass unemployment, have impressed themselves so deeply upon the
popular mind that, if offered the choice between liberty and security,
most people would almost unhesitatingly vote for security. Similar
situations have occurred at other periods of history. Thus, in the years
which witnessed the final disintegration of the Roman Empire, the
insecurity of life and property was such that many hitherto free
peasants and yeomen voluntarily made over their land and even their
persons to the nearest great lord, in exchange for his protection. It
was better, they felt, to be the serf or even the domestic slave of a
powerful noble than to be free, but at the mercy of bandits, barbarians
and the men-at-arms of other hereditary magnates. The sources of our
present insecurity are not the same as were the sources of the
insecurity of fifteen hundred years ago; but in both cases the reaction
to insecurity is identical—namely, a general wish to exchange freedom
for protection, independence for guaranteed subsistence in the service
of the holders of great power. But great power invariably exercises a
corrupting influence on those who wield it; and when, in due course, the
tyranny of the bosses in control of the omnipotent state becomes
unbearable, the masses who now pine for security will begin to pine even
more ardently for liberty. That they will be able to extort liberty from
a ruling minority equipped by science with the very latest in
self-propelled flame-throwers and atomic missiles seems in the highest
degree unlikely. It is in  satyagraha , or non-violent direct action,
that the only hope of future revolutions resides. Meanwhile there is no
question, in the contemporary world, of any popular movement in favour
of liberty. On the contrary, the masses are everywhere clamouring for
ever greater governmental control of everything. Nor are these demands
exclusively confined to the masses. The owners and managers of the
various capitalist systems of production are also victims of the general
insecurity. They too would like a measure of government control—enough
control to guarantee profits, but not so much, of course, as to
constitute expropriation or nationalization.

Is there any way in which the material advantages of progressive
technology can be combined not only with security, but also with
freedom? My own view, which is essentially that of the Decentralists, is
that, so long as the results of pure science are applied for the purpose
of making our system of mass-producing and mass-distributing industry
more expensively elaborate and more highly specialized, there can be
nothing but ever greater centralization of power in ever fewer hands.
And the corollary of this centralization of economic and political power
is the progressive loss by the masses of their civil liberties, their
personal independence and their opportunities for self-government. But
here we must note that there is nothing in the results of disinterested
scientific research which makes it inevitable that they should be
applied for the benefit of centralized finance, industry and government.
If inventors and technicians so chose, they could just as well apply the
results of pure science for the purpose of increasing the economic
self-sufficiency and consequently the political independence of small
owners, working either on their own or in co-operative groups, concerned
not with mass distribution, but with subsistence and the supply of a
local market. The sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath; and
the same is true of applied science. Human beings have certain physical
and psychological wants. They require food, clothing and shelter; and,
for moral and mental health, they need to be given the opportunity to
develop their latent potentialities to the fullest degree compatible
with the freedom and well-being of others. And beyond these primary
psychological needs lies man’s spiritual need—the need, in theological
language, to achieve his Final End, which is the unitive knowledge of
ultimate Reality, the realization that Atman and Brahman are one, that
the body is a temple of the Holy Ghost, that Tao or the Logos is at once
transcendent and immanent.

Now it seems pretty obvious that man’s psychological, to say nothing of
his spiritual, needs cannot be fulfilled unless, first, he has a fair
measure of personal independence and personal responsibility within and
toward a self-governing group, unless, secondly, his work possesses a
certain aesthetic value and human significance, and unless, in the third
place, he is related to his natural environment in some organic, rooted
and symbiotic way. But in modern industrial societies vast numbers of
men and women pass their whole lives in hideous cities, are wholly
dependent for their livelihood upon a capitalistic or governmental boss,
have to perform manual or clerical work that is repetitive, mechanical
and intrinsically meaningless, are rootless, propertyless and entirely
divorced from the world of nature, to which, as animals, they still
belong and in which, as human beings, they might (if they were
sufficiently humble and docile) discover the spiritual Reality in which
the whole world, animate and inanimate, has its being. The reason for
this dismal state of things is the progressive application of the
results of pure science for the benefit of mass-producing and
mass-distributing industry, and with the unconscious or conscious
purpose of furthering centralization of power in finance, manufacture
and government.

But now let us suppose that those who make it their business to apply
the results of pure science to economic ends should elect to do so, not
primarily for the benefit of big business, big cities and big
government, but with the conscious aim of providing individuals with the
means of doing profitable and intrinsically significant work, of helping
men and women to achieve independence from bosses, so that they may
become their own employers, or members of a self-governing, co-operative
group working for subsistence and a local market. Suppose, I repeat,
that this were henceforward to become the acknowledged purpose guiding
the labours of inventors and engineers. Seconded by appropriate
legislation, this differently orientated technological progress would
result, not as at present in the further concentration of power and the
completer subordination of the many to the few, but in a progressive
decentralization of population, of accessibility of land, of ownership
of the means of production, of political and economic power. Ralph
Borsodi’s studies have shown that mass-producing and mass-distributing
methods are technologically justified in about one-third of the total
production of goods. In regard to the remaining two-thirds, the
economies effected by mass-production are offset by the increased costs
involved in mass distribution over great areas, so that local production
by individuals or co-operating groups, working for subsistence and a
neighbourhood market, is more economical than mass production in vast
centralized factories. And to these economic advantages of
decentralization must be added the social advantages of a more humanly
satisfying life for more people, a greater measure of genuine
self-governing democracy and a blessed freedom from the silly or
pernicious adult education provided by the mass producers of consumer
goods through the medium of advertisements.

4. The continuous advance of science and technology has profoundly
affected the prevailing mental climate. The basic postulates of thought
have been changed, so that what to our fathers seemed obviously true and
important strikes us as either false or negligible and beside the point.
Let us consider a few of the more significant of these changes and their
effects upon the social and political life of our times.

( a ) Unlike art, science is genuinely progressive. Achievement in the
fields of research and technology is cumulative; each generation begins
at the point where its predecessor left off. Furthermore, the results of
disinterested research were from the first applied in such a way that
the upper and middle classes of all industrialized societies found
themselves becoming steadily richer and richer. It was, therefore, only
to be expected that the professional thinkers who sprang from these
classes, and who were familiar with the methods and achievements of
science, should have based upon the facts of technological and economic
progress a general theory of human life. The world, they affirmed, was
becoming materially, intellectually and morally better and better, and
this amelioration was in some way inevitable. The theory of progress—a
theory that soon became a dogma, indeed an axiom of popular thought—was
novel and, from an orthodox Christian point of view, heretical. For
orthodoxy, man was a fallen being. Humanity if not actively
deteriorating, was statically bad, with a badness which only grace in
co-operation with the individual’s free will could possibly mitigate. In
illustration of this, let us consider how the thirteenth century was
regarded by those who lived through it, and how it is regarded by modern
historians. For the latter it seems one of the most glorious periods in
European history; the former were unanimous (as Professor Coulton has
shown) in regarding it as an age of peculiar wickedness and manifest
degeneracy. Even in the age of Queen Elizabeth thoughtful men were still
talking of humanity’s decline. It was not until the late seventeenth
century (the age of the rise of modern science) that the note of
bumptious self-congratulation began to be sounded, not until the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries that the dogma of inevitable
progress became an unquestioned article of popular faith.

The belief in all-round progress is based upon the wishful dream that
one can get something for nothing. Its underlying assumption is that
gains in one field do not have to be paid for by losses in other fields.
For the ancient Greeks,  hubris , or overweening insolence, whether
directed against the gods, or one’s fellow-men, or nature, was sure to
be followed, sooner or later, in one way or another, by avenging
Nemesis. Unlike the Greeks, we of the twentieth century believe that we
can be insolent with impunity.

So intense is our faith in the dogma of inevitable progress that it has
survived two world wars and still remains flourishing in spite of
totalitarianism and the revival of slavery, concentration camps and
saturation bombing.

Faith in progress has affected contemporary political life by reviving
and popularizing, in an up-to-date, pseudo-scientific and this-worldly
form, the old Jewish and Christian apocalypticism. A glorious destiny
awaits mankind, a coming Golden Age, in which more ingenious gadgets,
more grandiose plans and more elaborate social institutions, will
somehow have created a race of better and brighter human beings. Man’s
Final End is not in the eternal timeless Now, but in a not too distant
utopian future. In order to secure the peace and happiness of their
great-great-grandchildren, the masses ought to accept and their rulers
need feel no qualms in imposing, any amount of war and slavery, of
suffering and moral evil, in the present. It is a highly significant
fact that all modern dictators, whether of the Right or of the Left,
talk incessantly about the golden Future, and justify the most atrocious
acts here and now, on the ground that they are means to that glorious
end. But the one thing we all know about the future is that we are
completely ignorant of what is going to happen, and that what does in
fact happen is often very different from what we anticipated.
Consequently any faith based upon hypothetical occurrences a long time
hence must always, in the very nature of things, be hopelessly
unrealistic. In practice, faith in the bigger and better future is one
of the most potent enemies to present liberty; for rulers feel
themselves justified in imposing the most monstrous tyrannies on their
subjects for the sake of the wholly imaginary fruits which these
tyrannies are expected (only an implicit faith in progress can say why)
to bear some time, let us say, in the twenty-first or twenty-second
century.

( b ) As theory, pure science is concerned with the reduction of
diversity to identity. As a praxis, scientific research proceeds by
simplification. These habits of scientific thought and action have, to a
certain extent, been carried over into the theory and practice of
contemporary politics. Where a centralized authority undertakes to make
plans, for an entire society, it is compelled by the bewildering
complexity of the given facts to follow the example of the scientific
experimenter, who arbitrarily simplifies his problem in order to make it
manageable. In the laboratory this is a sound and entirely justifiable
procedure. But when applied to the problems of human society, the
process of simplification is a process, inevitably, of restraint and
regimentation, of curtailment of liberty and denial of individual
rights. This reduction of human diversity to a military and
quasi-mechanical identity is achieved by propaganda, by legal enactments
and, if necessary, by brute force—by the imprisonment, exile or
liquidation of those persons, or those classes, who persist in their
perverse desire to remain themselves and are obstinate in their
reluctance to conform to the pattern which the political and economic
bosses find it, at the moment, most convenient to impose.
Philosophically, this ironing out of individual idiosyncrasies is held
to be respectable, because it is analogous to what is done by
scientists, when they arbitrarily simplify an all too complex reality,
so as to make nature comprehensible in terms of a few general laws. A
highly organized and regimented society, whose members exhibit a minimum
of personal peculiarities, and whose collective behaviour is governed by
a single master plan imposed from above, is felt by the planners and
even (such is the power of propaganda) by the plannees to be more
‘scientific’, and therefore better, than a society of independent,
freely co-operating and self-governing individuals.

( c ) The first step in this simplification of reality, without which
(since human minds are finite and nature is infinite) scientific thought
and action would be impossible, is a process of abstraction. Confronted
by the data of experience, men of science begin by leaving out of
account all those aspects of the facts which do not lend themselves to
measurement and to explanation in terms of antecedent causes rather than
of purpose, intention and values. Pragmatically they are justified in
acting in this odd and extremely arbitrary way; for by concentrating
exclusively on the measurable aspects of such elements of experience as
can be explained in terms of a causal system they have been able to
achieve a great and ever increasing control over the energies of nature.
But power is not the same thing as insight and, as a representation of
reality, the scientific picture of the world is inadequate, for the
simple reason that science does not even profess to deal with experience
as a whole, but only with certain aspects of it in certain contexts. All
this is quite clearly understood by the more philosophically minded men
of science. But unfortunately some scientists, many technicians and most
consumers of gadgets have lacked the time and the inclination to examine
the philosophical foundations and background of the sciences.
Consequently they tend to accept the world picture implicit in the
theories of science as a complete and exhaustive account of reality;
they tend to regard those aspects of experience which scientists leave
out of account, because they are incompetent to deal with them, as being
somehow less real than the aspects which science has arbitrarily chosen
to abstract from out of the infinitely rich totality of given facts.
Because of the prestige of science as a source of power, and because of
the general neglect of philosophy, the popular  Weltanschauung  of our
times contains a large element of what may be called ‘nothing-but’
thinking. Human beings, it is more or less tacitly assumed, are nothing
but bodies, animals, even machines; the only really real elements of
reality are matter and energy in their measurable aspects; values are
nothing but illusions that have somehow got themselves mixed up with our
experience of the world; mental happenings are nothing but epiphenomena,
produced by and entirely dependent upon physiology; spirituality is
nothing but wish fulfilment and misdirected sex; and so on. The
political consequences of this ‘nothing-but’ philosophy are clearly
apparent in that widespread indifference to the values of human
personality and human life which are so characteristic of the present
age. Within the past thirty years, this indifference has expressed
itself in a number of dangerous and disquieting ways. We have witnessed,
first of all, the wholesale revival of slavery in its worst and most
inhuman forms—slavery imposed upon political heretics living under the
various dictatorships, slavery imposed upon whole classes of conquered
populations, slavery imposed upon prisoners of war. Next, we note the
increasing indiscriminateness of slaughter during wartime. Area bombing,
saturation bombing, rocket bombing, bombing by atomic missiles—the
indiscriminateness has steadily increased throughout the Second World
War, until now no nation even makes a pretence of observing the
traditional distinction between civilians and combatants, innocent and
guilty, but all devote themselves methodically and scientifically to
general massacre and wholesale destruction. Other practical consequences
of our ‘nothing-but’ philosophies of life are the employment by
civilized people, with a high standard of scientific and technological
training, of torture, human vivisection and the systematic starvation of
entire populations. And finally there is the phenomenon of forced
migration—the removal at the point of the bayonet of millions of men,
women and children from their homes to other places, where most of them
will die of hunger, exposure and disease.

Unrealistic beliefs tend to result in foolish or morally evil actions;
and such wrong beliefs cannot be got rid of, except by teaching right,
or at least less erroneous, beliefs. If the ministers, of the various
sects and religions would abandon sentimentality and superstition, and
devote themselves to teaching their flocks that the Final End of man is
not in the unknowable utopian future, but in the timeless eternity of
the Inner Light, which every human being is capable, if he so desires,
of realizing here and now, then the myth of progress would lose its
harmfulness as a justifier of present tyranny and wrongdoing. If
scientists and technicians could be persuaded to read, for example, the
essays in Edward Carpenter’s  Civilization, Its Cause and Cure ,
together with Professor Burtt’s  Metaphysical Foundations of Modern
Science  and the speculative writings of Sir Arthur Eddington, the
disastrous notion that the contemporary scientific world picture is a
complete representation of reality, and the no less disastrous habit of
‘nothing-but’ evaluations of social and psychological facts, might
perhaps be eliminated, to the great advantage of suffering humanity. But
 quis custodiet custodes? —who is going to guard the guardians of our
civilization, and who is going to teach its teachers? Our basic trouble
is that, in spite of everything that has happened, everybody thinks he
is right. In the past, despots committed the crimes that despots always
do commit—but committed them with a conscience that was sometimes
distinctly uneasy. They had been brought up as Christians, as Hindus, as
Moslems or Buddhists, and in the depths of their being they knew that
they were doing wrong, because what they were doing was contrary to the
teachings of their religion. Today the political boss has been brought
up in our more enlightened and scientific environment. Consequently he
is able to perpetrate his outrages with a perfectly clear conscience,
convinced that he is acting for humanity’s highest good—for is he not
expediting the coming of the glorious future promised by Progress? is he
not tidying up a messily individualistic society? is he not doing his
utmost to substitute the wisdom of experts for the foolishness of men
and women who want to do what they think (how erroneously, since of
course they are not experts!) is best for them? And then there are the
pastors and the schoolmasters. They have their Ph.D.s and their D.D.s,
their academic positions and their cures of souls, their habits of
authority and their high perches in the pulpit or on the lecture
platform. Why should they change their long-established habits and the
hallowed traditions of the organizations of which they are the living
pillars? The most important lesson of history, it has been said, is that
nobody ever learns history’s lessons. The enormous catastrophes of
recent years have left the survivors thinking very much as they thought
before. A horde of Bourbons, we return to what we call peace, having
learned nothing and forgotten nothing—forgotten nothing, except, of
course, the causes of war, which (whatever our intentions and our
well-worded ideals) we do everything in our power to perpetuate.




                                   2


IN A World where the concentration of economic power is advantageous
to the ruling minority, it is only natural that the results of
disinterested scientific research should be applied in such a way as to
foster large-scale mass production and mass distribution. And in a world
where nationalism is taken for granted, and where the values of
nationalism are held to be supreme, it is only natural that these same
results should be applied to the end of producing and continually
improving the instruments of war. Because it paid them to do so, men of
science, inventors and engineers have worked to build up a system of
centralized industry; and because, as nationalists, they thought it was
their duty (and also, it must be added, because the duty was often a
very profitable one), they have worked to produce such marvels of
technological ingenuity as tanks, bombers, flame-throwers and atomic
missiles.

‘Nationality,’ wrote Lord Acton in 1862, ‘does not aim either at liberty
or prosperity, both of which it sacrifices to the imperative necessity
of making the nation the mould and measure of the state. Its course will
be marked with material as well as moral ruin.’ Acton’s prophecy is
still in the terrible process of fulfilment. The material havoc wrought
by applied science in the service of nationalism is such that it will
take a generation to repair the damage. For many millions of men, women
and especially children, the moral ruin caused by the war is
irreparable; to the end of their lives they are doomed to remain
psychologically warped, crippled and stunted. And these, of course, are
not the only gifts of the nationalism which (having repudiated all
belief in the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man) we have set
up as our idolatrous religion. The world is parcelled out into some
fifty-odd administrative units, calling themselves nations. In each of
these nations there is a state religion—namely, the worship of the
nation regarded as the supreme value, or God. To be a worshipper of one
of the fifty-odd national Molochs is, necessarily and automatically, to
be a crusader against the worshippers of all the other national Molochs.
Nationalism leads to moral ruin because it denies universality, denies
the existence of a single God, denies the value of the human being as a
human being; and because, at the same time, it affirms exclusiveness,
encourages vanity, pride and self-satisfaction, stimulates hatred and
proclaims the necessity and the rightness of war. The fatal consequences
of nationalism have been demonstrated again and again in the course of
history. Consider, for example, the civilization of ancient Greece—the
highest, in many respects, ever achieved in the Western world. After
only a brief life it perished, self-destroyed by nationalism. Each
city-state worshipped itself and consequently hated and despised its
neighbours. The Greek world of the great poets, artists and philosophers
was chronically in a state of civil war. In the end it bled to death,
the victim of idolatrous and separatist patriotism. Fortunately, the
Macedonians were at hand to take over.

The modern world differs from that of ancient Greece in degree and
scale, not in kind. What separatist patriotism did for the inhabitants
of a few thousand square miles in the eastern Mediterranean, it is doing
today for the population of the entire planet. As Athens and Sparta died
of idolatry and flag-waving and jingoism, so we shall die of idolatry
and flag-waving and jingoism. But whereas the technologists at the
service of the various Greek nationalisms had got no further than
chariots and javelins, the technologists at the service of our fifty-odd
self-worshipping administrative units have given us bombers that can fly
non-stop for eight thousand miles, incendiaries that nobody can put out,
and atomic missiles that are guaranteed to do to whole cities what a
quart of boiling water does to an ants’ nest.

‘Lead us not into temptation.’ The presence of this phrase in the Lord’s
Prayer reveals its author’s profoundly realistic appreciation of human
nature. Why should we pray that we may not be led into temptation? For
the excellent reason that, as all experience proves, whenever
temptations to evil are sufficiently strong and sufficiently frequent,
men and women generally succumb to them. The existence of powerful
armaments constitutes for their possessors a standing temptation to
resort to violence.  Si vis bellum, para bellum   and when the
preparations for war are carried on with all the resources of
progressive science and technology, the temptation to aggression, to the
defence or consolidation of legitimate interests, to the realization of
a manifest destiny (the names and justifications vary, but the nature of
the consequent war remains the same), becomes progressively more
intense, until at some critical moment—the moment when nation X feels
certain of being, in some strategically significant way, better armed
than nations Y and Z—it turns into a categorical imperative, a divine
command to go to war for the greater glory of the nation-god. Nor is
this the only temptation to present itself. Recent progress in the
applied science of armament-making has been a progress in the
development of weapons that will destroy more indiscriminately at
greater distances. High explosives and incendiaries, the heavy bomber
and the jet-propelled robot plane, the rocket and finally the atomic
missile—taken together these constitute a powerful temptation to ignore
the traditional rules of war and to obliterate wholesale entire civilian
populations and their dwellings. To this temptation all the belligerents
in the Second World War succumbed. And so long as governments and
manufacturers continue to subsidize research into the science and
technology of armaments, these temptations will remain, irresistibly
beckoning to nationalistic power lovers, just as drink and sex and money
beckon to their respective addicts.

In recent months many persons have optimistically argued that the
harnessing of atomic energy must (because that energy is so destructive)
put an end to men’s inveterate habit of making war. Similar arguments
have been set forth in the past. Whenever progressive applied science
has produced some strikingly more efficient instrument of slaughter,
hopes have been voiced, and facts and figures marshalled to prove, that
henceforward war would be too expensive in life, suffering and money to
be worth waging. Nevertheless wars have still been fought. Methods of
defence against the new destructive weapon are devised and yet more
efficient instruments of counterattack are invented. Advances in
technology do not abolish the institution of war; they merely modify its
manifestations. In the present instance it seems quite possible that
there may be no defence against atomic missiles. But this does not
necessarily presage the end of warfare. The collective mentality of
nations—the mentality which reasonable adults have to adopt, when
making important decisions in the field of international politics—is
that of a delinquent boy of fourteen, at once cunning and childish,
malevolent and silly, maniacally egotistical, touchy and acquisitive,
and at the same time ludicrously boastful and vain. When the issues
involved are of no great weight, the adults in control of a nation’s
policy are permitted, by the rules of the curious game they are playing,
to behave like adults. But as soon as important economic interests or
national prestige is involved, this grown-up Jekyll retires and his
place is taken by an adolescent Hyde, whose ethical standards are those
of a boy-gangster and whose  Weltanschauung  seems to have been formed
by a study of Houston Stewart Chamberlain and the more sanguinary comic
strips. And let us remember that this same delinquent boy who, concealed
in the middle-aged body of a politician, decrees that millions shall do
and suffer the utmost in scientifically organized malice, resides within
us all, ready and waiting, whenever some crisis makes us forget our
surface rationality and idealism, to come out into the open. To this
boy-gangster in our midst, the natural reaction to the atom bomb is not
an impulse to put an end to war by getting rid of its causes in
nationalism, economic rivalry and the craving for power. Rather it is an
impulse to make use of the new powers provided by science for the
purpose of establishing world dominion for his particular gang. It is a
highly significant fact that people love to talk about a war to end war,
or a war to preserve democracy; they do not love to talk about peace to
end war, or self-governing democracy (which is the polar antithesis of
militarism) to preserve democracy. Like the adult, with whom he is
associated, the nationalistic boy-gangster is frightened of what atomic
power may do to him and his world. Nevertheless he continues to think in
terms of gang rivalry and his own supremacy. ‘If,’ he argues, ‘our gang
can get its scientists to perfect the rocket and the atom bomb, if it
can get its manufacturers to produce enough plutonium and uranium 235,
to build enough launching ramps and robot planes and V2’s, then all that
need be done is to press a few buttons and bang! the war to end war will
be over, and I shall be the boss of the whole planet.’ Because of the
boy-gangster in every Foreign Office, every war department and every
private home, we may expect that, in the years immediately ahead of us,
all the (technologically speaking) advanced nations will spend vast sums
upon armament research and the manufacture of new weapons capable of
more indiscriminate destruction at ever greater distances. This research
will be secret—an affair of ‘Manhattan Projects’ and ‘Tube Alloys’—and
much of the manufacture will be carried on at the bottom of mines and
caverns. And at some moment—unless, by a miracle, Jekyll should
contrive to get the upper hand—the temptation to press those buttons
will become irresistible; the juvenile delinquent in some Ministry for
Foreign Affairs will call up his colleague at the Ministry of National
Defence and bang! the war to make the world yet safer for delinquency
will have begun.

In discussing the possibility of abolishing war, another important point
to be remembered is that the preparation for war and sometimes even war
itself are things which a highly centralized government finds very
useful for its own totalitarian purposes. Thus, peacetime conscription
is always justified on the ground that it constitutes an insurance
against war, or at least against defeat in war. In actual fact, of
course, nations which have adopted peacetime conscription have fought
just as many wars as they fought before adopting it, and have suffered
just as many defeats. The real, the unavowed reason for peacetime
conscription must be sought in the all too natural desire of a powerful,
centralized government to regiment and control its subjects by placing
them, actually or potentially, under martial law and by arrogating to
itself the right, whenever it so desires (as, for example, during an
inconvenient strike), to call them to the colours. In these days of
atomic weapons, mass armies would seem to have become something of an
anachronism. Nevertheless, no country which imposed peacetime
conscription in the past shows any inclination to relax its grip upon
the masses of its people. Moreover, in countries where peacetime
conscription was previously unheard-of there are many high military and
civilian officials who advocate the imposition of permanent military
servitude upon the masses.

There is also another way in which the preparation for war is useful to
the holders of centralized political power. When things go badly at
home, when popular discontent becomes inconveniently articulate, it is
always possible, in a world where war-making remains an almost sacred
habit, to shift the people’s attention away from domestic to foreign and
military affairs. A flood of xenophobic or imperialistic propaganda is
released by the government-controlled instruments of persuasion, a
‘strong policy’ is adopted toward some foreign power, an appeal for
‘national unity’ (in other words, unquestioning obedience to the ruling
oligarchy) is launched, and at once it becomes unpatriotic for anybody
to voice even the most justifiable complaints against mismanagement or
oppression. It is difficult to see how any highly centralized government
could afford to dispense with militarism and the threat of foreign war.
This constitutes yet another argument for the division and dispersal of
power, the de-institutionalizing of politics and economics and the
substitution, wherever possible, of regional co-operative self-help for
centralized mass production and mass distribution, and of regional,
co-operative self-government for state intervention and state control.

Finally, we have to consider the part played by militarism in solving
those problems of economic and social insecurity, which, as we have
seen, are the curse of a technologically progressive society. The great
depression of the 1930’s was accompanied, in all industrialized
countries, by mass unemployment. This fearful social sickness was
treated in a variety of ways. Thus, in Great Britain an ambitious
housing programme was launched; in the United States the Roosevelt
administration resorted to public works, ‘pump priming’ and restriction
of agricultural output with a view to raising prices. These measures
were only partially successful. The numbers of the unemployed were
reduced, but unemployment was by no means eliminated. Complete success
came only when Hitler embarked upon large-scale rearmament. As though by
magic, unemployment was banished—first from Germany and, later, as
other countries took fright and joined the armament race, throughout the
rest of the industrialized world. A cure had been found for the
insecurity which is the fruit of scientific and technological progress
when it is at the service of centralized finance. But the price of the
temporary cure was death and destruction, and the last state of all the
nations concerned was incomparably worse than the first. Nevertheless it
seems quite possible that wholesale rearmament may, at some future date,
again be used to palliate the symptoms of unemployment.

It should be remarked that, under the present dispensation, armaments
are the only goods that are given away without consideration of costs or
profits. Modern war is, among other things, a competition among nations
as to which can hand out, free, gratis and for nothing, the largest
amount of capital goods in the shortest time. These capital goods are
all maleficent and unproductive; but the thought occurs to one that
something resembling wartime prosperity might be made permanent if there
were more giving away at cost, or even for nothing, and less selling at
a profit and paying of interest. Were this to happen, we should have a
centralized financing, mass production and mass distribution, combined
with a political system, approximating state socialism. That this
arrangement would in some ways be preferable to the present dispensation
seems likely enough. But we must remember that any government enjoying a
monopoly of political and economic power is exposed to almost
irresistible temptations to tyranny. There has never been a time when
too much power did not corrupt its possessors, and there is absolutely
no reason to suppose that, in this respect, the future behaviour of
human beings will be in any way different from their behaviour in the
past and at the present time. The arguments for the limitation and
decentralization of power remain valid, even when that power is
concentrated in the hands of an oligarchy of socialists—a phrase which
is actually a contradiction in terms; for, to quote Mr. Middleton Murry 
‘Socialism by autocracy or oligarchy is not socialism, or anything like
it.’ It is just benevolent despotism; and there is nothing in the record
of history to justify us in the belief that any benevolent despotism
will for long retain its benevolence. The appetite for power grows with
every successive satisfaction of that most alluring and pernicious of
all the lusts. Against the temptations to abuse power there is no armour
except sanctity. But since very few human beings are prepared to pay the
price of sanctity and very few saints desire power, mere common sense
demands that the amount of power wielded by any individual or
organization of individuals should be strictly limited and that the
principle of self-government (which is the principle of the division of
power, the balancing and compromise of independent forces) should be
applied, and applied to the extreme practicable limit, in every field of
human activity. This entails the de-institutionalization of many
political and economic procedures, which are at present planned from
above by the functionaries of private capitalism or the national state.
In present circumstances it is most unlikely that this highly desirable
process of decentralization and de-institutionalization will be carried
out. By the education they have received in schools and, later, at the
hands of the writers of advertising copy and political propaganda, the
great majority of men and women have been conditioned to believe that
progressive institutionalization, controlled by private capitalists, or
the state, or both together, is an intrinsically beneficent thing and at
the same time an inevitable and quasi-natural development. Those who
have a reasoned belief in the current centralist philosophy and those,
much more numerous, who take it for granted by an act of implicit faith,
cannot be expected to look with anything but suspicion on the ideas of
de-institutionalization, self-help and self-government. What is needed
is a restatement of the Emersonian doctrine of self-reliance—a
restatement, not abstract and general, but fully documented with an
account of all the presently available techniques for achieving
independence within a localized, co-operative community. These
techniques are of many kinds—agricultural techniques designed to supply
the basic social unit, the family, with its staple food supply;
mechanical techniques for the production of many consumer goods for a
local market; financial techniques, such as those of the credit union,
by means of which individuals can borrow money without increasing the
power of the state or of commercial banks; legal techniques, through
which a community can protect itself against the profiteer who
speculates in land values, which he has done nothing whatever to
increase. At present this documented and practical restatement of an old
doctrine is being made by such men as Wilfred Wellock in England, as
Ralph Borsodi and the writers who contribute to  Free America  in the
United States. In the enormous bellowing chorus of advertisers singing
the praises of centralized mass-producing and mass-distributing
industry, and of Left-wing propagandists singing the praises of the
omnipotent state, these few isolated voices have some difficulty in
making themselves heard. If it were not for the fact that, in the past,
apparently negligible movements, originating among individuals without
any political power, have yet exercised a prodigious influence over
mankind, there would be reason for discouragement. But fortunately it is
not impossible that the presently tiny piece of decentralist leaven may
end by leavening the whole huge lump of contemporary society.

It is not impossible, I repeat; but it must be added that, so long as
the nations stick to their ancient habit of war-making, it is highly
improbable. For the nature of modern war is such that it cannot be
successfully waged by any nation which does not possess a highly
developed, not to say hypertrophied, capital-goods industry supplemented
by a mass-producing consumer-goods industry capable of rapid expansion
and conversion for wartime needs. Furthermore it cannot be waged
successfully, except by nations which can mobilize their entire
man-power and woman-power in universal military or industrial
conscription. But universal conscription is most easily imposed where
large numbers of the population are rootless, propertyless and entirely
dependent for their livelihood upon the state or upon large-scale
private employers. Such persons constitute that dream of every
militaristic dictator—a ‘fluid labour force,’ which can be shifted at
will from one place or one unskilled job to another place or job. Again,
big centralized corporations and their wage-earning employees can be
taxed much more easily and profitably than small-scale farmers working
primarily for subsistence and only secondarily for cash, or than
independent or co-operative producers of commodities for a localized
market. For this reason anything like a popular movement in the
direction of decentralization could hardly be tolerated by any
government desirous of becoming or remaining a ‘great power.’ It may be
argued that the bomber and the rocket may force all nations to undertake
a geographical dispersion of industries; but such dispersion can take
place without any real decentralization of political and economic power,
any real increase of individual independence from governmental or
capitalist control, or any expansion of the present area of voluntary
co-operation, self-government and de-institutionalized activity.

‘Science’ is an abstract word, and when we are trying to think about
concrete political and economic problems, it is best to talk concretely,
not of science but of the people who work in the various scientific
fields, from the fields of uncontaminated theory and disinterested
research into basic problems to those of applied science and technology.
Assuming that the abolition of war is desirable, we proceed to ask
ourselves how scientific workers can help to achieve this end.

1. As individuals or in organized groups, scientific workers can take
three kinds of action against war. There is, first, the possibility of
negative action in the form of a refusal, on conscientious grounds, to
participate in work having as its purpose the killing, torture or
enslavement of human beings. Christianity once insisted, and Buddhism
still insists, upon the importance of ‘right livelihood.’ There are
certain professions so intrinsically harmful that no individual ought to
practise them. In the eyes of medieval Catholic theologians, for
example, the profession of a moneylender or of a speculator was beyond
the pale  they held that a man could not live by usury and the
manipulation of the commodity markets, and still be regarded as a
Christian. Similarly, for Buddha and his followers, a man could not be
regarded as a Buddhist, if he made his living by the manufacture of arms
or intoxicants. Men of science and technologists would do well, as
individuals and in their national and international organizations, to
consider the problem of right livelihood in its relation to their own
contemporary activities. Is it possible to work on the development of
instruments of ever more indiscriminate slaughter and to remain—not a
good Christian or a good Buddhist; for in scientific and technological
circles religion is now out of fashion—but a good human being? Is it
possible to go on believing that one is working for the good of mankind,
while applying the results of disinterested research in ways which
demonstrably increase the power of the ruling capitalist or governmental
minority at the expense of personal liberty and local and professional
self-government? These and similar questions need to be asked and
carefully answered by scientific workers—asked and answered, if
possible, on the level of their international organizations. Meanwhile
it is to be hoped and perhaps expected that a certain number of
individual scientists and technicians will take the negative stand
against war and the centralization of power which is war’s inevitable
accompaniment, by refusing to collaborate in any project whose purpose
is the destruction or enslavement of human beings.

2. Negative action is good so far as it goes, but it needs to be
supplemented by action of a positive and constructive kind. Such
positive action may be classified under two heads  ( a ) action which
takes its start in politics, to end in the field of science  and ( b )
action which takes its start in science, to end in politics.

( a ) Several suggestions have recently been made for the political
control, in the interests of humanity, of the activities of scientists
and technologists. Thus, in the course of an interesting two-day debate
in the House of Lords (May 29 and 30, 1945) Lord Vansittart urged the
necessity of subjecting all German laboratories, whether attached to
universities or supported by the state or by private industrialists, to
strict supervision over a long term of years. Only in this way, he
claimed, could the danger of a war of revenge, waged with new ‘secret
weapons,’ be avoided. More realistically, Lord Brabazon proposed that
this supervision of scientific developments should not be confined
exclusively to the defeated nations—nations whose opportunities for the
large-scale manufacture of new weapons would, for many years at least,
be small. His suggestion was that, under the final peace treaties, an
international committee of inspection should be constituted, having
authority to enter laboratories and factories in any part of the world.
In Lord Brabazon’s view, the only alternative to such a scheme of
international inspection would be an armament race between Britain and
the United States on the one hand and the rest of the world on the
other. By intensive research the Anglo-Saxon group might hope to obtain
the lead in such a race, and so discourage attack by other powers. Lord
Brabazon’s speech was made before the dropping of the first atomic bomb.
As things now stand, the United States and Britain already possess an
enormous lead in the post-war armament race. For a few years they may
keep that lead. Then other nations (unless, of course, they are
previously blown to bits by the present possessors of the bomb, or
unless reason, surrender of absolute sovereignty and world government
come to replace nationalism) will be supplied by their scientists with
the same or even better methods for manufacturing atomic missiles.
Meanwhile the desirability of an international inspectorate charged with
preserving humanity from the triumphs of science is even greater now
than it was before Hiroshima. The existence of an international
inspectorate would involve the adoption of another security measure,
advocated in the course of the same debate by Lord Strabolgi—namely,
the pooling of all scientific discoveries considered by competent
experts to be actually or potentially a danger to mankind.

Similar suggestions have been made on the other side of the Atlantic,
and it now remains to be seen whether, and to what extent, the United
Nations will act upon them. Meanwhile Messrs. Truman, Attlee and King
have decided to keep such secrets as their scientists and engineers
still possess until ‘enforceable safeguards’ against their use for
destructive purposes can be devised.

What is to be the nature of those ‘enforceable safeguards’? As yet, it
would seem, nobody has any very clear idea. In principle, the proposals
for a pooling of dangerous knowledge and for an international
inspectorate are excellent; and, to some, the theory of an
‘international police force’ seems attractive and even workable. But,
alas, from principle to application and from theory to practice the road
is long and hard. Two disturbing questions inevitably propound
themselves. First, will the various national governments concerned agree
to act upon these suggestions? Second, if they do agree, will they and
the men of science they employ consent to play the game according to the
internationally imposed rules? In attempting to answer these questions
one must weigh the power of enlightened self-interest against the power
of nationalistic passions and prejudices. Enlightened self-interest will
unquestioningly vote for world government, international inspection and
the pooling of information. But unfortunately, in some of the most
important issues of life, human beings do not act from considerations of
enlightened self-interest. If they did, we should now be living in
something very like paradise. In the field of international politics, as
we have seen, the gravest decisions are always taken, not by reasonable
adults but by boy-gangsters. Despite the lessons of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, it is quite possible that some national governments will
refuse to allow their laboratories and factories to be inspected—and,
of course, the refusal of even one government will entail the general
abandonment of the scheme. Alternatively, the principle of international
inspection will be accepted; but at first some and then (when suspicion
has been aroused) all the governments concerned will conspire with the
scientists in their employ to carry on research in caves or forests or
mountain fastnesses, where no prying eye can see what they are up to. It
may perhaps seem unlikely that workers trained in the methods of science
should support their political bosses in machinations so manifestly
senseless, as well as immoral. But it is not because men have learned to
behave rationally in the laboratory that they can be trusted to behave
rationally toward foreigners and unpopular minorities, or even toward
their own wives and children. Until a very few years ago the best
scientific and technological education available was given in Germany;
but most of the persons who received that education not only worked for
the Nazi bosses, but believed in their doctrines and were swayed by the
nationalistic passions which they so skilfully exploited. The case of
Germany is not unique. In all countries nationalistic passions (of the
same kind as were manifested in Germany, but at a somewhat lower level
of intensity) are almost as common among scientists and technicians as
in other classes of society. In spite of their training (perhaps,
indeed, owing to the narrowly specialized character of that training,
because of it), scientists and technicians are perfectly capable of the
most dangerously irrational prejudice, nor are they immune to deceitful
propaganda. The same men who reject as superstitious the belief in a
transcendent and immanent spiritual Reality beyond and within phenomena,
prove by their actions that they find no difficulty in worshipping as a
supreme god whichever one of the world’s fifty-odd nations they happen
to belong to, and in accepting the infallibility of the local Foreign
Office and the quasi-divinity of the local political boss. In view of
all this we need not be surprised if the plans for an international
inspectorate and the pooling of scientific knowledge should fail in
practice to produce the good results expected of them.

( b ) We must now consider the specifically scientific action which
might be taken by men of science and technicians with a view to
diminishing the probability of war and so to increasing the sum of human
liberty. Such action can only be taken on the plane of applied science.
Basic research is essentially disinterested. Men undertake it because,
in the words used by the boy Clerk Maxwell, they want to find out
‘what’s the go’ of things—to discover how nature works and how its
parts are related within a causal system. What is subsequently done with
the results of disinterested research is something which the researcher
cannot foresee, and for which he is not responsible. Thus, Clerk
Maxwell’s own adult curiosity to find out the go of such things as light
and magnetism led him to certain conclusions, and these conclusions have
since been utilized by technicians for the development of instruments,
which are now used, in the main, for the dissemination of maudlin drama,
cigarette advertising, bad music and government-sponsored or
capitalist-sponsored propaganda. Clerk Maxwell would probably have been
horrified by all these uses of the radio, and he is, of course, in no
way to blame for them. In practice, it would seem, basic research cannot
be planned, except perhaps to the extent of subsidizing inquiry into
branches of knowledge which, for whatever reason, appear to have been
unduly neglected. If the facilities for research are supplied, men and
women with an overpowering desire to find out the go of things will
always be forthcoming to make use of them. The planning of scientific
activity with a view to achieving certain predetermined political,
social and economic ends must begin at the point where the results of
disinterested research are applied to the solution of practical
problems. Individually and through their professional organizations,
scientists and technicians could do a great deal to direct the planning
toward humane and reasonable ends.

In theory everyone agreed that applied science was made for man and not
man for applied science. In practice great masses of human beings have
again and again been sacrificed to applied science. The conflict between
science, as it has been applied up to the present, and human interests
was clearly stated by Thorstein Veblen in his  Science in the Modern
World . In this essay Veblen distinguishes between what he calls the
pragmatic and the scientific point of view. Pragmatically human beings
know pretty well what is good for them, and have developed myths and
fairy tales, proverbs and popular philosophies, behaviour-patterns and
moralities, in order to illustrate and embody their findings about life.
The findings of science—especially of science as applied for the
benefit of the holders of centralized economic and political power—are
frequently in conflict with humanity’s pragmatic values, and this
conflict has been and still is the source of much unhappiness,
frustration and bitterness. The enormous practical importance of the
clash between scientific (or rather applied-scientific) values and
pragmatic human values is stressed in an editorial which appeared in a
recent issue (July 22, 1945) of the leading British scientific journal
 Nature . In maintaining industrial morals ‘the central difficulty,’
writes the author of this article, ‘is essentially the inevitable
opposition which develops between the scientific approach to the human
problems of production and the political approach of the administrator,
trained in the method of accommodation and compromise. The balancing of
opinion and the compromise of different points of view, which is the
essence of the political process, may be totally at odds with the
scientific approach to questions of industrial management. What is
required is not the surrender of scientific principles of established
accuracy, or the ignoring of accepted fact, but the combination or
integration of both the political and scientific approach in a solution
which satisfies both the scientific and the psychological or political
requirements.’

Let us begin by noting that in any discussion of economic or political
problems, the word ‘integration’ is always a danger signal; for it is
always tacitly assumed that the work of integration is carried out by
somebody standing above the processes and persons to be integrated. In
other words, whenever people call for ‘integration’ they are always
calling for the exercise of centralized governmental power and for yet
another extension of the process of institutionalization. But power is
always corrupting, and no human being or group of human beings is to be
trusted with too much of it for too long. When science is applied in
such a way as to create a form of production, which cannot be run
efficiently without coming into sharp conflict with fundamental human
values, and which therefore continually calls for the intervention of a
governmental authority having power to ‘integrate’ the conflicting
persons and points of view, it may be fairly presumed that the
application of the results of disinterested research has been, humanly
speaking, misguided and undesirable. Up to the present time applied
science has not been used mainly or primarily for the benefit of
humanity at large, or (to put the matter less abstractly) for the
benefit of individual men and women, considered as personalities each
one of which is capable, given suitable material and social conditions,
of a moral and spiritual development amounting, in some cases, to a
total transfiguration; rather man has been used for applied science, for
the technicians who enjoy designing more and more complicated gadgets,
and for the financial and governmental interests which profit by the
centralization of power. If applied science is henceforward to be used
for man, technicians and scientists will have to adopt a professional
policy, consciously and deliberately designed to serve fundamental human
needs and to forward the causes of peace and personal liberty. Such a
policy could not be worked out in detail except by an international
organization of scientific workers, highly trained in their respective
fields, so that each could contribute his or her share of skill or
information toward the realization of the common end—namely, the
welfare, liberty and peace of the individuals composing the human race.
It would be absurd for me to try to anticipate the findings of this
hypothetical group of experts; but it is possible, without too much
presumption, to indicate in a general way a few of the lines which their
discussion would have to follow.

Humanity’s primary requirement is a sufficiency of food; but it is
primarily by considerations of power that the policies of national
governments are at present dictated. The ruling minorities of the world
invariably contrive to have enough, and (to judge by the disgusting
descriptions of recent diplomatic banquets) more than enough to eat,
consequently they tend to take food for granted and to think first, and
at times almost exclusively, in terms of the questions  Who shall bully
whom? But the great majority of the men, women and children on this
planet are in no position to take food for granted. Their first and
often their exclusive concern is the next meal. The question as to who
shall bully whom is of hardly more than academic interest to them. They
would like, of course, to be left in peace to go their own way; but they
know by bitter experience that, under the present dispensation, there
will always be a ruling minority to order them about, to bully and
badger them in the name of the divine Nation, the omniscient Party, the
sacred Principles of this or that political doctrine. They are therefore
unable to take much interest in the national and international policies,
which are the prime concern of the well-fed power lovers at the top of
the social pyramid.

At the San Francisco Conference the only problems discussed were
problems of power. The basic problem of mankind—the problem of getting
enough to eat—was relegated to an obscure international committee on
agriculture. And yet it is surely obvious that if genuine international
agreement is ever to be reached and preserved, it must be an agreement
with regard to problems which, first, are of vital interest to the great
masses of humanity and which, second, are capable of solution without
resort to war or the threat of war. The problems of power are primarily
the concern of the ruling few, and the nature of power is essentially
expansive, so that there is not the least prospect of power problems
being solved, when one expanding system collides with another expanding
system, except by means of organized, scientific violence or war. But
war on the modern scale shatters the thin, precarious crust of
civilization and precipitates vast numbers of human beings into an abyss
of misery and slow death, of moral apathy or positive and frenzied
diabolism. If politicians were sincere in their loudly expressed desire
for peace, they would do all they could to by-pass the absolutely
insoluble problems of power by concentrating all their attention, during
international conferences and diplomatic discussion, on the one great
problem which every member of the human race is concerned to solve—the
one great problem which not only does not require military violence for
its solution, but which, for the world at large, is wholly insoluble so
long as the old games of militarism and power politics continue to be
played. The first item on the agenda of every meeting between the
representatives of the various nations should be   How are all men,
women and children to get enough to eat? 

It is fashionable nowadays to say that Malthus was wrong, because he did
not foresee that improved methods of transportation can now guarantee
that food surpluses produced in one area shall be quickly and cheaply
transferred to another, where there is a shortage. But first of all,
modern transportation methods break down whenever the power politicians
resort to modern war, and even when the fighting stops they are apt to
remain disrupted long enough to guarantee the starvation of millions of
persons. And, secondly, no country in which population has outstripped
the local food supply can, under present conditions, establish a claim
on the surpluses of other countries without paying for them in cash or
exports. Great Britain and the other countries in western Europe, which
cannot feed their dense populations, have been able, in times of peace,
to pay for the food they imported by means of the export of manufactured
goods. But industrially backward India and China—countries in which
Malthus’ nightmare has come true with a vengeance and on the largest
scale—produce few manufactured goods, consequently lack the means to
buy from underpopulated areas the food they need. But when and if they
develop mass-producing industries to the point at which they are able to
export enough to pay for the food their rapidly expanding populations
require, what will be the effect upon world trade and international
politics? Japan had to export manufactured goods in order to pay for the
food that could not be produced on the overcrowded home islands. Goods
produced by workers with a low standard of living came into competition
with goods produced by the better paid workers of the West, and
undersold them. The West’s retort was political and consisted of the
imposition of high tariffs, quotas and embargoes. To these restrictions
on her trade Japan’s answer was the plan for creating a vast Asiatic
empire at the expense of China and of the Western imperialist powers.
The result was war. What will happen when India and China are as highly
industrialized as pre-war Japan and seek to exchange their low-priced
manufactured goods for food, in competition with Western powers, whose
standard of living is a great deal higher than theirs? Nobody can
foretell the future; but undoubtedly the rapid industrialization of Asia
(with equipment, let it be remembered, of the very latest and best
post-war design) is pregnant with the most dangerous possibilities.

It is at this point that internationally organized scientists and
technicians might contribute greatly to the cause of peace by planning a
world-wide campaign, not merely for greater food production, but also
(and this is the really important point) for regional self-sufficiency
in food production. Greater food production can be obtained relatively
easily by the opening up of the earth’s vast subarctic regions at
present almost completely sterile. Spectacular progress has recently
been made in this direction by the agricultural scientists of the Soviet
Union; and presumably what can be done in Siberia can also be done in
northern Canada. Powerful ice-breakers are already being used to solve
the problems of transportation by sea and river; and perhaps commercial
submarines, specially equipped for travelling under the ice, may in the
future ensure a regular service between Arctic ports and the rest of the
world. Any increase of the world’s too scanty food supply is to be
welcomed. But our rejoicings must be tempered by two considerations.
First, the surpluses of food produced by the still hypothetical Arctic
granaries of Siberia and Canada will have to be transferred by ship,
plane and rail to the overpopulated areas of the world. This means that
no supplies would be available in wartime. Second, possession of
food-producing Arctic areas constitutes a natural monopoly, and this
natural monopoly will not, as in the past, be in the hands of
politically weak nations, such as Argentina and Australia, but will be
controlled by the two great power systems of the post-war period—the
Russian power system and the Anglo-American power system. That their
monopolies of food surpluses will be used as weapons in the game of
power politics seems more than probable. ‘Lead us not into temptation.’
The opening up of the Arctic will be undoubtedly a great good. But it
will also be a great temptation for the power politicians—a temptation
to exploit a natural monopoly in order to gain influence and finally
control over hitherto independent countries, in which population has
outstripped the food supply.

It would seem, then, that any scientific and technological campaign
aimed at the fostering of international peace and political and personal
liberty must, if it is to succeed, increase the total planetary food
supply by increasing the various regional supplies to the point of
self-sufficiency. Recent history makes it abundantly clear that nations,
as at present constituted, are quite unfit to have extensive commercial
dealings with one another. International trade has always, hitherto,
gone hand in hand with war, imperialism and the ruthless exploitation of
industrially backward peoples by the highly industrialized powers. Hence
the desirability of reducing international trade to a minimum, until
such time as nationalist passions lose their intensity and it becomes
possible to establish some form of world government. As a first step in
this direction, scientific and technical means must be found for making
it possible for even the most densely populated countries to feed their
inhabitants. The improvement of existing food plants and domestic
animals; the acclimatization in hitherto inhospitable regions of plants
that have proved useful elsewhere; the reduction of the present enormous
waste of food by the improvement of insect controls and the
multiplication of refrigerating units; the more systematic exploitation
of seas and lakes as sources of food; the development of entirely new
foods, such as edible yeasts; the synthesizing of sugars as a food for
such edible yeasts; the synthesizing of chlorophyll so as to make direct
use of solar energy in food production—these are a few of the lines
along which important advances might be made in a relatively short time.

Hardly less important than regional self-sufficiency in food is
self-sufficiency in power for industry, agriculture and transportation.
One of the contributing causes of recent wars has been international
competition for the world’s strictly localized sources of petroleum, and
the current jockeying for position in the Middle East, where all the
surviving great powers have staked out claims to Persian, Mesopotamian
and Arabian oil, bodes ill for the future. Organized science could
diminish these temptations to armed conflict by finding means for
providing all countries, whatever their natural resources, with a
sufficiency of power. Water power has already been pretty well
exploited. Besides, over large areas of the earth’s surface there are no
mountains and therefore no sources of hydro-electric power. But across
the plains where water stands almost still, the air often moves in
strong and regular currents. Small windmills have been turning for
centuries; but the use of large-scale wind turbines is still, strangely
enough, only in the experimental stage. Until recently the direct use of
solar power has been impracticable, owing to the technical difficulty of
constructing suitable reflectors. A few months ago, however, it was
announced that Russian engineers had developed a cheap and simple method
for constructing paraboloid mirrors of large size, capable of producing
superheated steam and even of melting iron. This discovery could be made
to contribute very greatly to the decentralization of production and
population and the creation of a new type of agrarian society making use
of cheap and inexhaustible power for the benefit of individual
small-holders or self-governing, co-operative groups. For the peoples of
such tropical countries as India and Africa the new device for directly
harnessing solar power should be of enormous and enduring
benefit—unless, of course, those at present possessing economic and
political power should choose to build mass-producing factories around
enormous mirrors, thus perverting the invention to their own
centralistic purposes, instead of encouraging its small-scale use for
the benefit of individuals and village communities. The technicians of
solar power will be confronted with a clear-cut choice. They can work
either for the completer enslavement of the industrially backward
peoples of the tropics, or for their progressive liberation from the
twin curses of poverty and servitude to political and economic bosses.

The storage of the potentialities of power is almost as important as the
production of power. One of the most urgent tasks before applied science
is the development of some portable source of power to replace
petroleum—a most undesirable fuel from the political point of view,
since deposits of it are rare and unevenly distributed over the earth’s
surface, thus constituting natural monopolies which, when in the hands
of strong nations, are used to increase their strength at the expense of
their neighbours and, when possessed by weak ones, are coveted by the
strong and constitute almost irresistible temptations to imperialism and
war. From the political and human point of view, the most desirable
substitute for petroleum would be an efficient battery for storing the
electric power produced by water, wind or the sun. Further research into
atomic structure may perhaps suggest new methods for the construction of
such a battery.

Meanwhile it is possible that means may be devised, within the next few
years, for applying atomic energy to the purposes of peace, as it is now
being applied to those of war. Would not this technological development
solve the whole problem of power for industry and transportation? The
answer to this question may turn out to be simultaneously affirmative
and negative. The problems of power may indeed be solved—but solved in
the wrong way, by which I mean in a way favourable to centralization and
the ruling minority, not for the benefit of individuals and
co-operative, self-governing groups. If the raw material of atomic
energy must be sought in radioactive deposits, occurring sporadically,
here and there, over the earth’s surface, then we have natural monopoly
with all its undesirable political consequences, all its temptations to
power politics, war, imperialistic aggression and exploitation. But of
course it is always possible that other methods of releasing atomic
energy may be discovered—methods that will not involve the use of
uranium. In this case there will be no natural monopoly. But the process
of releasing atomic energy will always be a very difficult and
complicated affair, to be accomplished only on the largest scale and in
the most elaborately equipped factories. Furthermore, whatever political
agreements may be made, the fact that atomic energy possesses unique
destructive potentialities will always constitute a temptation to the
boy-gangster who lurks within every patriotic nationalist. And even if a
world government should be set up within a fairly short space of time,
this will not necessarily guarantee peace. The Pax Romana was a very
uneasy affair, troubled at almost every imperial death by civil strife
over the question of succession. So long as the lust for power persists
as a human trait—and in persons of a certain kind of physique and
temperament this lust is overmasteringly strong—no political
arrangement, however well contrived, can guarantee peace. For such men
the instruments of violence are as fearfully tempting as are, to others,
the bodies of women. Of all instruments of violence, those powered by
atomic energy are the most decisively destructive; and for power lovers,
even under a system of world government, the temptation to resort to
these all too simple and effective means for gratifying their lust will
be great indeed. In view of all this, we must conclude that atomic
energy is, and for a long time is likely to remain, a source of
industrial power that is, politically and humanly speaking, in the
highest degree undesirable.

It is not necessary in this place, nor am I competent, to enter any
further into the hypothetical policy of internationally organized
science. If that policy is to make a real contribution toward the
maintenance of peace and the spread of political and personal liberty,
it must be patterned throughout along the decentralist lines laid down
in the preceding discussion of the two basic problems of food and power.
Will scientists and technicians collaborate to formulate and pursue some
such policy as that which has been adumbrated here? Or will they permit
themselves, as they have done only too often in the past, to become the
conscious or unconscious instruments of militarists, imperialists and a
ruling oligarchy of capitalistic or governmental bosses? Time alone will
show. Meanwhile, it is to be hoped that all concerned will carefully
consider a suggestion made by Dr. Gene Weltfish in the September, 1945,
issue of the  Scientific Monthly . Before embarking upon practice, all
physicians swear a professional oath—the oath of Hippocrates—that they
will not take improper advantage of their position, but always remember
their responsibilities toward suffering humanity. Technicians and
scientists, proposes Dr. Weltfish, should take a similar oath in some
such words as the following  ‘I pledge myself that I will use my
knowledge for the good of humanity and against the destructive forces of
the world and the ruthless intent of men; and that I will work together
with my fellow scientists of whatever nation, creed or colour for these
our common ends.’

                                THE END




                        Printed in Great Britain
                     at Hopetoun Street, Edinburgh,
                      by T. and A. CONSTABLE LTD.
                Printers to the University of Edinburgh.




                           TRANSCRIBER NOTES


Misspelled words and printer errors have been corrected.

Inconsistencies in punctuation have been maintained.

A cover was created for this eBook.

[The end of  Science, Liberty And Peace  by Aldous Leonard Huxley]
